 “For man will then have no enemy. On that day the lands of Šubur and Hamazi, As well as twin-tongued Sumer—great mound of the power of lordship— Together with Akkad—the mound that has all that is befitting— And even the land Martu, resting in green pastures, 145 Yea, the whole world of well-ruled people, Will be able to speak to Enlil in one language! For on that day, for the debates between lords and princes and kings Shall Enki, for the debates between lords and princes and kings, For the debates between lords and princes and kings, 150 Shall Enki, Lord of abundance, Lord of steadfast decisions, Lord of wisdom and knowledge in the Land, Expert of the gods, Chosen for wisdom, Lord of Eridug, Change the tongues in their mouth, as many as he once placed there, 155 And the speech of mankind shall be truly one!’” (Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat: EPSK 2:144–155)
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
EPSK 1: Submission of Ararat to Uruk #1: Enmerkar vs. Ensuhgirana
EPSK 2: Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat
EPSK 3: Enmerkar’s Seige of Ararat #1: Lugalbanda’s sickness/recovery in cave
EPSK 4: Enmerkar’s Seige of Ararat #2: Lugalbanda’s miraculous speed from Ararat to Uruk
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
The Kingdom of Nimrod
Civil war between Nimrod and his elders: North vs. South
Nimrod of Uruk defeats Ensuhgirana king of Ararat
Enmerkar as Nimrod
 
Preface: About Enmerkar vs. the king of Ararat:
See also: Nimrod builds the Tower of Babel 
 
 
A. Cast of characters and places in the four ancient stories:
1.      Unug: City of Uruk
2.      Aratta: City of Aratta and/or Mt. Ararat and the kingdom whose capital city in close by or at the Mt. Ararat.
3.      Enmerkar: King of Uruk near the Persian Gulf and a good candidate for Nimrod based upon Gen 10:7-12
4.      Ensuhgirana: King of Mt. Ararat only named in story one, but referred to as the “king of Ararat” in stories 2-4.
5.      Lugalbanda: son of Enmerkar in stories 3-4.
6.      Inana/Inanna: (Ishtar, Venus) Goddess of war, strife, and sexual love; city goddess of Unug (Uruk) and Aratta (Ararat).
7.      Anzud bird: Lion-faced mythical bird; guardian of the mountain ranges between Sumer and Aratta.
8.       Nimrod: Founder of Babel and Uruk and the entire Assyrian nation.
a.       "The sons of Cush were Seba and Havilah and Sabtah and Raamah and Sabteca; and the sons of Raamah were Sheba and Dedan. Now Cush became the father of Nimrod; he became a mighty one on the earth. He was a mighty hunter before the LORD; therefore it is said, “Like Nimrod a mighty hunter before the LORD.” The beginning of his kingdom was Babel and Erech and Accad and Calneh, in the land of Shinar. From that land he went forth into Assyria, and built Nineveh and Rehoboth-Ir and Calah, and Resen between Nineveh and Calah; that is the great city." (Genesis 10:7–12)
b.       "They will shepherd the land of Assyria with the sword, The land of Nimrod at its entrances; And He will deliver us from the Assyrian When he attacks our land And when he tramples our territory." (Micah 5:6)
9.      Three main characters in the four stories: Enmerkar king of Uruk, his son Lugalbanda, and Ensuhgirana the King of Ararat.
a.       “The main actors in the cycle are Enmerkar, Lugalbanda, and the Lord of Aratta. The first two appear in the Sumerian King List as rulers of Unug. While Lugalbanda was the recipient of a cult, especially in Nippur, from the Ur III period right through the Old Babylonian period (i.e., right through about 1600 B.C.E.), his only literary survival outside the cycle is found in a few royal hymns and a few mentions in the Gilgamesh epic. In the Sumerian cycle of the Gilgamesh stories Lugalbanda is mentioned as Gilgamesh’s father. In the Akkadian epic Lugalbanda is called Gilgamesh’s (personal) god. To be sure, there is a very old (c 2500 BC) text describing how Lugalbanda won his wife Ninsun, but this story is not reflected in our cycle. Enmerkar, however, had more of a literary afterlife. He is mentioned in one of the legends of the Kings of Akkad, in a mythical story about Adapa, and in a so-called chronicle of the earliest times. Furthermore, there is a still enigmatic composition apparently dealing with Enmerkar’s construction of a house for Inana. (Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta, H. L. J. Vanstiphout, Jerrold S. Cooper, Vol. 20, p6, 2003 AD)
 
 
 
B. The four storylines of Enmerkar vs. the king of Ararat (Ararat “RRT”= city “R” of Aratta “RT”):
1.      Submission of Ararat to Uruk #1: Enmerkar vs. Ensuhgirana [EPSK 1]:
a.       After a boasting match between two kings as to who is the idol goddess Inana’s preferred sexual partner, followed by competing wizardry spells and counter-spells to cause and break famine in Urek, Ensuhgirana the king of Ararat submits to Enmerkar king of Uruk.
b.      “In the days when Enmerkar rules over the splendid and awesome city of Unug, the lord of Aratta, Ensuhgirana by name, claiming to be the recipient of Inana’s favors, demands Enmerkar’s submission to Aratta. Enmerkar refuses, pointing out that it is obvious that he himself is Inana’s true and constant lover. The lord of Aratta apparently admits that he has been beaten in this part of the game, but, although criticized by his own people, he in turn refuses to submit to Unug. A sorcerer from Hamazi offers his services to break the stalemate: he claims to be able to bring Unug to submission. The lord of Aratta accepts the offer. The wizard travels to the city of Ereš, where he casts a spell on the cattle of the goddess Nisaba. They stop giving milk, and there is famine in Sumer. A cowherd and a shepherd implore the sun god, who sends a wise woman. She catches up with the wizard on the banks of the Euphrates. They start a competition in magic. Five times the wizard throws fish spawn in the river and draws out an animal; five times the wise woman draws out another animal, which catches the wizard’s animal and presumably eats it. Then the wise woman accuses the wizard of black magic, since his magic is draining away the life force of Sumer. He admits that he has been beaten at his own game and pleads for his life. She refuses, takes away his vital force, and thus reenlivens the city of Ereš. Upon hearing this, the lord of Aratta admits defeat and submits to Enmerkar.” (Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta, H. L. J. Vanstiphout, Jerrold S. Cooper, Vol. 20, p23, 2003 AD)
2.      Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat [EPSK 2]:
a.      The great trade dispute: Ensuhgirana the king of Ararat refuses to supply the new rival king Enmerkar (Nimrod) with precious metals and stones needed to build Uruk. As in the first story [EPSK 1], the demand of submission of Ararat to Enmerkar is based upon who the goddess Inana (Venus) prefers to go to bed with. This time, however, Inana sends a message through Enmerkar to Ensuhgirana the king of Ararat that she prefers Enmerkar and therefore must supply the trade goods. In a kind of “Battle of Wits”, like in the Princess Bride, the ranking king of Ararat creates three impossible to solve challenges for Enmerkar, which of course, he solves. Enmerkar supplies two reasons why Ensuhgirana the king of Ararat must submit to his authority, become a vassal king and send the gold and precious stones. First, Enmerkar points out that he is the first one to build a mud brick temple to the pagan goddess in Uruk and that there is no temple building anywhere else in the world including the kingdom of Ararat. Here the Nimrod = Enmerkar synchronism strongly supports that Nimrod was a rebeller, not only for political insurrection to human powers, but for being the first person to invent and propagate and entire pantheon of idol gods. To the Hebrews at Mt. Sinai in 1446 BC, Nimrod’s Assyrian represented “the gods of your fathers beyond the river”.  Second, Enmerkar argues that he invented the first written form of language on earth: Cuneiform. He wishes for the world to be restored like it was before the Tower of Babel when all men spoke a single language. In the end a dog fight is proposed to determine who is the top king but Inana herself then orders Ensuhgirana the king of Ararat to both submit and trade with the uprising fledgling kingdom of Enmerkar in the south.
b.      “The story seems deceptively simple. Enmerkar, king of Unug, wants to embellish his city and the whole of Sumer with precious metals and stones, goods that are not to be found in Sumer but only in the fabulously wealthy city Aratta, which lies behind the mountains. Since trade does not as yet exist, he asks the goddess Inana what he should do: Inana is the goddess of Aratta as well. She favors Enmerkar and advises him to send a messenger with a challenge to Aratta, requisitioning what he wants and enforcing his claim by stating that she favors him. He does so, but the (unnamed) lord of Aratta refuses, claiming that Inana is his goddess as well and that anyway his mountain city is an impregnable fastness. Still, he is willing to enter into a contest with Enmerkar in order to see whose side Inana is really on. This results in a counterchallenge that takes the form of an unsolvable riddle: if Enmerkar succeeds in carting grain to Aratta in open nets instead of bags, he might reconsider. Enmerkar finds a solution: he uses sprouting barley to close the interstices of the nets so that no grain is spilled. Sending off the grain, he repeats his challenge. This time the lord of Aratta asks him to bring him a scepter made of no existing material. Enmerkar solves this riddle as well: he prepares a gluelike plastic substance that he pours into a hollow reed; after this mass has hardened, which takes a long time, he breaks away the reed mould and sends off the scepter with a renewed challenge. Finally, the lord of Aratta requests a dog of no known color to fight his own dog. Enmerkar again finds a solution: he weaves a cloth of no known color. When this is sent off to Aratta the messenger complains that the message has become too long and difficult for him to remember and reproduce. Thereupon Enmerkar invents writing—which throws the lord of Aratta in despair. At this point Iškur, the god of storm and rain, intervenes, and the famine and drought that was scourging Aratta at the time is over. The fight between the two dogs now appears as part of a festival. Inana reappears, confirms her predilection for Enmerkar, but also tells him to institute peaceful trade with Aratta from now on.” (Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta, H. L. J. Vanstiphout, Jerrold S. Cooper, Vol. 20, p49, 2003 AD)
3.      Enmerkar’s Seige of Ararat #1: Lugalbanda’s sickness/recovery in cave [EPSK 3]:
a.      These two stories revolve around Enmerkar’s son Lugalbanda. Again, Ensuhgirana [named in EPSK 1] the northern king of Ararat refuses to submit to the southern kingdom of Enmerkar at Uruk. Lugalbanda joins the army in marching from Uruk to Mt. Ararat but becomes sick along the way. He is left in alone in a cave with provisions to die. He begs to be healed and offers four successive prayers to the sun god, moon god, star god and once again to the sun god. All the god’s gather with him for a feast and they heal Lugalbanda so that he can now travel north to join the siege the city of Aratta (Urartu = Ur-Artu = Ur of Aratta. Note: Ur = city as in Ur of Chaldees = City of the Chaldeans]. Here we see the narrative invoking the memory of when city walls had first been built, which indicates the story is after the tower of Babel. At the feast of gods a group of competing gods arrive and a battle between “darkness and light” ensues. (really darkness and darkness). After the opposing gods are defeated, Lugalbanda begins to travel to join the military siege at the mudbrick city wall of the capital city of the King of Ararat.
b.      “Enmerkar of Unug [Eruk] wants to conquer Aratta. During the march, Lugalbanda (his son?) falls mortally ill and is abandoned in a cave in the mountains. He prays to the great luminaries, who save his life. Being all alone, he reinvents fire, cooking, and baking. He captures a wild bull and a wild goat. Acting on a portentous dream, he sacrifices these animals to the great gods. A band of spirits arrives. The hero masters them with the help of Utu. There seems to follow a battle between the forces of light and the forces of darkness. The former seem to win this battle.” (Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta, H. L. J. Vanstiphout, Jerrold S. Cooper, Vol. 20, p97, 2003 AD)
4.      Enmerkar’s Seige of Ararat #2: Lugalbanda’s miraculous speed from Ararat to Uruk [EPSK 4]:
a.      In a continuation of the first installment, Enmerkar’s son Lugalbanda, now healed by the gods in the cave begins to travel to join the military siege of his father at the mudbrick city wall of the capital city of the King of Ararat. On route he gains the favour of the mythical Anzud bird by feeding its chicks and is granted miraculous powers of speed travel. After arriving at the siege, which lasted a year without success, he uses his new found super speed to run alone back to the mudbrick temple of Inana at Uruk to ask for her help Ensuhgirana [named in EPSK 1] the king of Ararat submits to Enmerkar without bloodshed.
b.      “Lugalbanda is now stranded in the highlands. He decides to go and look for the Anzud bird, who rules over that region. He feasts Anzud’s chick so well that it is stuffed with food and probably asleep when its parents return from foraging; therefore, it does not answer their call. The frightened parents are very happy when Lugalbanda appears and tells them what has happened. Anzud rewards him with the gift of superhuman speed. He returns to his companions, who are laying siege to Aratta. To force a decision, Enmerkar sends Lugalbanda back to Unug in order to ask for Inana’s advice. In a single day Lugalbanda reaches Unug, and Inana gives her advice. Aratta seemingly submits peacefully.” (Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta, H. L. J. Vanstiphout, Jerrold S. Cooper, Vol. 20, p97, 2003 AD)
 

 
Young Earth Archeological Dating by Steven Rudd: 2019
Christian Archeological Dating (CAD)
Creation: 5444 BC (LXX)
Noahic Flood: 3298 BC
Tower of Babel 2850 BC
Steven Rudd: January 2019
Chronological notes:
1.      Creation to Flood = 2146 years
2.      430 years in Egypt (Ex 12:40, Gal 3:17)
3.      Exodus 1446 BC, Conquest 1406 BC
4.      Shiloh destroyed in 1096 BC
5.      Solomon’s temple begun in 967 BC
6.      Terah 130 years old when Abraham born in 2166 BC (Acts 7:4)
7.      Kainan 130 years old when his son Shelah was born (Lxx: Gen 11:12; 10:24; 1 Chr 1:17; Lk 3:36)
Date
Archeological Age
Rationale for archeological age and notes
GLOBAL FLOOD 3298 BC (LXX)
Population 8
3298-3200
Stone age:
(Paleolithic
Neolithic
Chalcolithic)
Halaf
Hassuna
1.      Noahic Flood: Oldest possible archeology on earth.
a.       Pre-flood man encased in 2km rock flood deposit (Grand Canyon)
b.      Most early archeological ages were concurrent rather than consecutive and represent geographic or individual pottery maker’s differences in quality rather than evolutionary transitions in long periods of time.
2.      First Inana goddess figurines near Ararat before Nimrod but no temples.
3.      Sites include Tepe Gawra, Değirmen Tepe
4.      Nimrod born 3225
5.      Population Calculator: 6 Persons (three breeding couples- Noah had no other children). Breeding lifespans over 400 years. In 2018 Somalia had a 3.8% growth rate)
3200 BC: Nimrod founds Babel: Ubaid 1
Population 800
3200-3000
Paleolithic
Neolithic Chalcolithic
Halaf, Hassuna
Ubaid 1,2
1.      3200: Nimrod, age 25, founds Babel (Eridu), Babel/Eridu, Uruk/Erech, Accad and Calneh in the southern land of Shinar.
2.      Nimrod builds the first mudbrick temples (XVII to VII) built for Enki at Eridu (water god and patron god of Eridu) and another mudbrick temple built for Inana at Uruk (sex and war goddess and patron god of Uruk).
3.      Population: 800 (6 Persons @ 5% growth 100 yrs. after flood)
3000 BC: Nimrod founds Nineveh: Ubaid Peaceful Expansion
Population 300,000
3000-2850
Paleolithic
Neolithic Chalcolithic
Halaf, Hassuna
Ubaid 3 Expansion
Ubaid 4:2950 BC
Urek 1,2: 2900 BC
1.      Friendly expansion 1800 north from Babel (Eridu)
2.      First trade networks created by Nimrod.
3.      Nimrod’s pagan gods transmitted north to Ararat.
4.      Nimrod, age 225, founds Nineveh, Rehoboth-Ir, Calah in the north
5.      Excavations at Nineveh date the origin of the city to the Ubaid 3 (late Neolithic and early Hassuna culture period).
6.      Eridu temples VI to II
7.      Nimrod invents the bevel-rim bowl (BRB) and mass produces them in molds.
8.      Population: 300,000 (800 Persons @ 3% growth 200 years: 3200-3000 BC)
2850 BC: Nimrod builds Tower of Babel: Late Uruk Colonial Expansion
FIRST WRITTEN LANGUAGES
Sumerian Cuneiform, Egyptian Hieroglyphic
Population 12 million
2850-2800
“Late Uruk 3 Expansion”
Early Bronze (EB I)
Naqada I
1.      Nimrod, age 375, builds Tower of Babel: 2850 BC
a.       Eridu temple I, dedicated to Enki, the water god, included a huge flat platform for the tower of Babel.
b.      A Ziggurat may have been started on this platform, but it was abandoned until 2040 BC when the Ziggurat of Amar-Sin at Eridu was constructed then repaired in 1990 AD. You can visit it today in Iraq.
2.      Nimrod’s bevel-rim bowl (BRB) is distributed rapidly all over the world.
3.      Founding of Jerusalem (Gihon), Jericho (Spring), Egypt (Nile), Byblos, Tyre, Sidon, Ashkelon (ocean), Dan (spring), Beidha/Petra (Spring)
4.      Pre-Dynastic Egypt: 2850 (dynasty 0)
5.      First written languages in 2850 BC when men had to use known symbols to communicate as seen in pictorial cuneiform, hieroglyphs and Chinese.
6.      Population: 12 million
a.       300,000 Persons @ 3% growth 150 years: 3000-2850 BC.
b.      Using Somalia’s 2018 AD growth rate of 3.8% for 400 years with a starting population of 6 equals a final population of 14 million.

 

 

Introduction:
1.       Dating of these four stories: 2100 BC
a.         “There is little doubt that the cycle originated in the Ur III period (2112–2004 B.C.E.), but the actual form of the texts and the tablets themselves date almost exclusively from the Isin-Larsa period (2017–1763 B.C.E.) and are products of the scribal schools, predominantly those of Nippur and Ur.” (Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta, H. L. J. Vanstiphout, Jerrold S. Cooper, Vol. 20, p1, 2003 AD)
b.         Both Nimrod and Enmerkar lived second generation from the flood.
c.        “All the stories make a point of setting the happenings in a definite period: the glorious reign of Enmerkar of Unug [Eruk]. According to the Sumerian King List, the dynasty to which he belongs was the second one after the flood, and thus it antedated the presumed composition of our texts by at least some seven thousand years. But more important is the additional notice in that same document: the entry explicitly says that he is “the one who built Unug. [Eruk]” The stories themselves point this out in their introductory parts and even in the substance of the story (in ELA) or in some important passages (Enmerkar’s plea to Inana at the end of LB II). Thus the stories are set in the greatest of heroic times, when the city was first built.” (Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta, H. L. J. Vanstiphout, Jerrold S. Cooper, Vol. 20, p4, 2003 AD)
d.        “The story of Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta begins in legendary times, before many of the inventions of civilization — such as written communication by letter. Enmerkar ruled in Uruk as “priest-king” (EN), and was the human husband of Inanna, with whom he united yearly in the rite of the sacred marriage. The lord of Aratta ruled in the fabled city of Aratta which lay in the mountains far away to the east. He also was the spouse of Inanna with the responsibilities for the city’s prosperity. But Inanna, we are told loved Enmerkar best.” (COS, Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta 1.170, Vol 1, p547, 1997 AD)
e.          In the Sumerian Kings list, 2nd dynasty may correspond to simply father son rule, since each would live 500 years with many sub-rulers in between.
2.      Overview Summary of the theme and plot of the four stories:
a.       The Rise of king Nimrod as told in the four Enmerkar vs. Aratta stories:
                                                               i.      The theme of all four Enmerkar vs. Aratta stories is the submission of the older northern kingdom at Mt. Ararat to the younger new kingdom of Enmerkar at Uruk.
                                                             ii.      “The “Matter of Aratta” is the somewhat anachronistic term used for a group of four narrative poems2 in Sumerian, dealing with the various ways in which King Enmerkar, the legendary ruler of Unug—the Sumerian name for Uruk (biblical Erech, now Warka)—won supremacy over the faraway, fabulous, and fabulously rich legendary city of Aratta. Together with the Sumerian cycle of Gilgamesh tales, the Aratta stories constitute what may be called, anachronistically again, the Gesta Urukaeorum—or the Legends of the Kings of Uruk. These kings, who represent just two or three generations, appear in the Sumerian King List—an ideological document probably drawn up in the eighteenth century B.C.E. and purporting to be historical—as the second dynasty after the flood.” (Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta, H. L. J. Vanstiphout, Jerrold S. Cooper, Vol. 20, p1, 2003 AD)
                                                           iii.      “The legendary rulers have made Unug/Sumer preeminent among the nations and have laid the foundation, materially and ethically, for its supremacy. The reasons advanced for this superiority, technologically as well as ethically and perhaps even theologically (the support of the gods; the attitude of Inana), may reflect an ideal situation, but they are clearly derived from the actual or supposed situation that obtained during the glorious Ur III period.” (Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta, H. L. J. Vanstiphout, Jerrold S. Cooper, Vol. 20, p13, 2003 AD)
b.      Nimrod’s (Enmekar) South vs. North civil war:
                                                               i.      Young upstart King Nimrod’s rise to power requires him to defeat the existing supreme king and ruler of Mt. Ararat.
                                                             ii.      The submission of the kingdom of Aratta (the first post flood government) to the new southern government of Nimrod occurred before the flood.
                                                           iii.      The setting clearly indicates it is post flood and post tower of Babel when the languages were confounded that quickly brought about the invention of cuneiform by Nimrod. We see Nimrod as already having built the first pagan shrine on earth before one existed in Aratta. The story indirectly confirms that Nimrod the rebeller to the northern kingdom of Ararat also rebelled against God almighty by being the creator of the entire pantheon of pagan gods.
                                                           iv.      New rising power challenges old established power
                                                             v.      Younger children challenge their parent’s authority.
                                                           vi.      South challenges north
                                                         vii.      Babel (Eridu) and Uruk challenges the City of Aratta (Ararat)
                                                       viii.      Poor challenges rich in Ararat.
                                                           ix.      Nimrod’s new idol gods at Eridu vs the established monotheism of Ararat and those alive who were on Noah’s Ark.
c.       This is a perfect match for the two step Nimrod story of the Bible where a second generation from Noah’s ark becomes a great king:
                                                               i.      Stage 1: Nimrod begins building his kingdom in the southern Land of Shinar at Babel (Eridu) and Uruk (Gen 10:10)
                                                             ii.      Stage 2: Nimrod expands his rule north to Nineveh (Gen 10:11). It is this second expansion in Genesis Gen 10:11 where the four stories are set.
3.      Refusal to trade triggered the civil war:
a.       Ararat’s refusal to send gold, silver and precious stones to Enmerkar (Nimrod)
b.      While the northern first original kingdom at Aratta had an early start in mining minerals etc, Nimrod is seen as a rebel for setting up a new kingdom and is denied any exported goods to build his new cities of Babel, Uruk etc.
c.       “Enmerkar, king of Unug, wants to embellish his city and the whole of Sumer with precious metals and stones, goods that are not to be found in Sumer but only in the fabulously wealthy city Aratta” (Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta, H. L. J. Vanstiphout, Jerrold S. Cooper, Vol. 20, p49, 2003 AD)
d.      The four stories document the riches of Ararat’s Gold and precious stones they wouldn’t share:
                                                               i.      Kingdom of Ararat refused to share its wealth or even trade with Nimrod in the south
                                                             ii.      ‘Therefore, Aratta, having packed gold nuggets in leather sacks, ‘And packed them tight with gold dust, ‘And wrapped the precious metals in bales, ‘And loaded mountain asses with the crates” (Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat: EPSK 2:196–199)
                                                           iii.      “Let him [lord of Aratta] hold it in his hand like a string of carnelian and lapis lazuli beads; “Let the lord of Aratta bring that to me [Enmekar]! Tell him that!” (Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat: EPSK 2:345)
                                                           iv.      “Artfully work gold and silver for my sake! 40 [Let them cut for my sake] polished lapis lazuli from its block; [Let them work for my sake] the translucent smooth lapis lazuli; [Let them] build [for my sake] the holy mountain in Unug! A temple [descended] from heaven—your place of worship, The shrine Eana—let [Aratta] build that! 45 The holy Gipar, your dwelling, Let Aratta artfully adorn its inner chamber for my sake So that I, the beaming youth, may embrace you therein! Let Aratta submit to Unug! Let the people of Aratta 50 Bring down for me the stones of their hills and mountains And build for me the great shrine, erect for me the great abode! For my sake, let them make illustrious the great abode, the abode of the gods!” (Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat: EPSK 2:39–52)
                                                             v.      Therefore, Aratta, having packed gold nuggets in leather sacks, 125 And packed them tight with gold dust” (Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat: EPSK 2:124–125)
4.      Origin of Trade: Ararat’s trade war with Nimrod resolved:
a.       Inana [goddess] orders the king of Aratta to trade their gold with Enmerkar: “The people of Aratta Have as their task the trading of gold and lapis lazuli And the fashioning of golden fruits and fruity bushes Laden with figs and grapes…; they shall heap up these fruits in great piles; They shall dig out flawless lapis lazuli in lumps; They shall remove the crowns of the sweet reeds, And for Inana, Lady of the Eana, They shall heap them up in piles in the courtyard of the Eana.” (Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat: EPSK 2:618–625)
b.      “Thus the invention of trade, which concludes ELA [Enmerkar vs. the lord of Aratta: EPSK 2], is based upon Sumer’s abundant wheat crops with the attendant technology (the first impossible task), its high technology resulting in the fashioning of the scepter from an artificial material (the second task), and the high standard of its textile industry (the last task). These three technological advances represent Unug’s favorable position in the balance of trade: in this way they can have at their disposal the “raw material” (precious stones and metals) Aratta has to offer. But there is more: by the globalization of the use of their language (the Spell of Nudimmud!) and by the invention of writing they also control this international trade.43 But there is also a moral or ethical aspect to Sumer’s superiority.” (Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta, H. L. J. Vanstiphout, Jerrold S. Cooper, Vol. 20, p9, 2003 AD)
c.       Again, the conflict is solved without bloodshed but negotiation.
5.      Etymology of Aratta = Urartu = Mt. Ararat
a.       Lord of Aratta is the King of the kingdom of Ararat which ruled the world after the flood.
b.      Aratta [RT] and Ararat [RT] are spelled identically in Cuneiform and refer to the same place.
c.       Urartu = Ur-Artu = Ur-Ararat = City of Ararat
d.      Ararat = Ar-Arat = Ur-Arat = Ur-Aratta = Ur [city] of Aratta
e.      “Cuneiform is not alphabetic. Its monolingual. This means that each character expresses a syllable rather than in an alphabet where each character expresses a phoneme (sound). Alphabetical characters express much simpler units and that’s why most alphabets are around 26 characters whereas cuneiform inventories number in the 100s or 1000s.” (Matt Hassler, Email, 2019 AD)
f.        “Aratta = biblical Ararat = Assyrian Urartu = Uru-Mania = classical Armenia. Both language wise, and geographically/historically. If you are asking for a further suggestion, you might want to consider that the first element of Ararat is Ar/Ur which has the meaning ’settlement’ and later ‘city’ (as in Ur of the Chaldees and Urushalayim). Similarly, Urartu is a later rendition of Ur-Aratu. So Ar-Arat could be ’settlement or city of Arat[ta]’. This would be the multi-coloured walled city mentioned in the Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta text.” (David Rohl, who also proposes Enmerkar as a candidate for Nimrod, Email, 2019 AD)
g.       It is truly puzzling why “Bible trashing scholars” claim that Aratta is “Unknown, probably mythical, city” and NEVER make the obvious connection between Urartu = Ararat = Aratta = Mt. Ararat.
6.      Immediately after the flood those on the ark, built dwellings near and around Mt. Ararat.
a.       The king of Ararat boasts that the people of Ararat were “special and distinct” BECAUSE they survived the flood: “(On the contrary), the right and left flanks of Aratta— Inana, Lady of all the countries, Protects them when the mighty flood is rising! Its people are distinct from other people; They are a nation Dumuzid selected among the other nations, One that firmly establishes the holy word of Inana! So let now the Wise Dog and the … of Dumuzid lock on to each other. Quick, come, [my] young …! They were steadfast before the flood. After the flood had swept over, Inana, Lady of all the countries, Out of her great love for Dumuzid, Sprinkled the water of life over them, And subjected the Land to them!” (Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat: EPSK 2:563–576)
b.      The oldest archeology in the world is a 60 km circle around Mt. Ararat.
c.       The natural rulers were the four men who were on the ark.
d.      A dynastic/patriarchal kingdom of Ararat ruled the world and all men were under a single government.
e.      A single clan kingdom was established and as the population grew from 8 to 800 from 3298 – 3200 BC, young Nimrod (25 years old) decided to “rebel” against this dynastic kingdom of Ararat.
7.      Events between the Flood and the Tower of Babel were “pre-military warfare times”:
a.       The three challenges for submission in “Enmerkar and the lord of Aratta” are not resolved by war and killing but a “battle of wits”, like in the Princess Bride.
                                                               i.      This invokes the historical memory before the flood when Nimrod defeated the king of Aratta by peaceful means, not military, given the world population might be in the thousands at this early post ark period.
                                                             ii.      Ancient battles would sometimes be solved by vicarious warriors representing each side. However, as we see in the story of David and Goliath, although the Philistines agreed to submit to King Saul if Goliath lost the fight, they ended up reneging on the oath and ran back to Gath.
                                                           iii.      This is further evidenced in the final challenge of dogs fighting to the death rather than human warfare where precious few souls populated the earth.
b.      The Lord of Ararat therefore, challenges a dog fight to solve the problem.
                                                               i.      “My dog will wrangle with his dog so that the stronger one be known. Tell him that! Second, when you speak to him, say also this: He must now stop prevaricating and come to a decision. Those of his city shall walk before him like sheep, and he, like a shepherd, shall follow them. At his coming, the holy mound of lapis lazuli shall humble itself before him like a crushed reed. They shall amass shining gold and silver for Inana of the Eana in the courtyard of Aratta in great piles.” (Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat: EPSK 2:475–485)
                                                             ii.      Notice in the final challenge of the dogs, that Iškur (storm god and son of chief god Enlil) sent the rain upon Aratta. The king of Aratta replies that Inana (god) protects Aratta from the flood. This is a clear reference to the Noahic flood universally believed in by the earliest Sumerians down to the time of Abraham. Key is the statement that Aratta gets special protection (distinct) from other people who are not protected and die. But the falling rain dismisses the final challenge and the two parties are now at peace. Again, this invokes the memory of how non-military means were used before the tower of Babel and shortly after, to form governments.
c.       “For all their cultural pretensions and their avowed aspiration to world domination, there is hardly any sign of xenophobia in these tales. Military glory is spurned and even somewhat ridiculed in at least two of the poems. Instead, the emphasis is on cultural and technical prowess, expressed as the highest form of intelligence and, of course, including writing. Furthermore, they overtly prefer their dominant position to be based on peaceful coexistence, even friendly relations with the outer world, to brute strength. (Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta, H. L. J. Vanstiphout, Jerrold S. Cooper, Vol. 20, p15, 2003 AD)
d.      While the two latter stories (Enmerkar’s Seige of Ararat #1 and #2) have a siege of the newly walled royal capital city of the old kingdom of Ararat, nobody actually is killed. Again the submission of Ararat to Nimrod (Enmerkar) is settled without bloodshed. Also remember that these four stories were composed over 1000 year after the events actually took place, so the “myths” were not always entirely technically accurate although they preserved the feel of the true historic events.
8.      Development of city walls over time historically validated through archeology:
a.       Archeologically, several ancient sites existed for a period without city walls, but then later, the walls were added. Some sites had two distinct walled cities including separate garbage dumps! This all evidences the confusion of language at Babel where people would start being unable to communicate and hostilities began triggering war and the need for city walls.
b.      In the early stories of Enmekar vs. Aratta, Ararat is not seen as a city with walls
c.       In the two latter Lugalbanda vs. Aratta stories, there is brickwork and the city that can be sieged:
                                                               i.      Aratta’s battlements are of greenish lapis lazuli; Its wall and its towering brickwork are bright red; Its bricks are of tinstone” (Enmerkar’s Seige of Ararat #1: Lugalbanda’s sickness/recovery in cave: EPSK 3.2:413–415)
d.      The fruitless and unsuccessful one-year siege of Aratta that had city walls:
                                                               i.      “By the watchtowers of Aratta, Unug and Kulab pitched camp. From the city javelins were raining down as from a cloud; Slingstones, numerous as the raindrops falling in a whole year, Were whizzing down from the wall of Aratta. Days went by and lengthened into months; a whole year passed. The harvest grew yellow beneath the skies. Worrying, they looked at the fields; they grew uneasy. Slingstones, numerous as the raindrops falling in a whole year, Kept falling on the roads. Mountain thorns hemmed them in.” (Enmerkar’s Seige of Ararat #1: Lugalbanda’s sickness/recovery in cave: EPSK 3.2:254–264)
9.      Inana’s (goddess) love for Enmekar grows cold in old age proving that Nimrod lived long not old age and was a worshipper of the pagan goddess Inana.
a.       In the two earlier Enmekar vs. Aratta stories, the love of goddess Inana with Enmerkar hot and passionate.
                                                               i.      Enmekar and the lord of Aratta both claim to have the best sexual relationship with Inana.
                                                             ii.      Enmekar, however, claims that Inana she prefers him and gives him better love!
b.      In the two latter Lugalbanda vs. Aratta stories, Inana’s love for Enmerkar had grown cold.
c.       Recalling the founding of Uruk when Inana loved him, but now much later he questions her love, indicating a later period of time:
                                                               i.      “Enmerkar, son of the Sun, Spoke harsh words to Inana: Once upon a time my noble sister, Holy Inana, From her bright mountain chose me in her holy heart And made me enter Kulab, the Brickwork. Unug then was a mere marsh, oozing water. Where there was dry land Euphrates poplars grew. Where there was a reed thicket old and young reeds grew together. Enki, king of Eridug, Made me tear out the old reeds and made me drain the water. Fifty years I was building, fifty years I was working [to build Babel and Uruk]. So now, if eventually in all of Sumer and Akkad The Martu, who know no grain, should rise up, There stands the wall of Unug [Eruk], extended across the desert like a bird net! But here, in this place, my power seems to be finished! My troops are bound to me as a calf to its mother. Yet, like a child that hates its mother and leaves the city My noble sister, Holy Inana, Has run back to Kulab, the Brickwork! Could she love her city, yet hate me? She should link the city to me! Could she hate her city, yet love me? She should link the city to me! Should the nu-gig—as happened to the Anzud chick— Reject me in person And abandon me by keeping to her holy chamber, Let her at least bring me back to Kulab, the Brickwork! Only on that day my spear shall be laid aside; On that day my shield shall be broken! Speak thus to my noble sister, Holy Inana!” Enmerkar’s Seige of Ararat #1: Lugalbanda’s sickness/recovery in cave: EPSK 3.2:292–321
10.  Supernatural power to run like Elijah to Tirzah and Mt. Sinai:
a.       In the first Lugalbanda vs. Aratta story, Lugalbanda is granted speed as a reward by feeding its chicks.
                                                               i.      Speed was granted to Lugalbanda by a bird called an Anzud. An Anzud is Lion-faced mythical bird; guardian of the mountain ranges between >Sumer and >Aratta.
                                                             ii.      “The strength of running shall abound in your thighs, so that you never tire. “There shall be power in your arms; “Your arms shall stretch wide, your force shall not weaken. “Traveling like the Sun, like Inana, “Like the seven storms of Iškur, “You shall leap like the flame, jump like lightning! “You shall be able to go wherever you choose, “Set your feet wherever you cast your eyes, “Arrive wherever your heart prompts you, “And loosen your sandals only where your heart tells you!” Enmerkar’s Seige of Ararat #1: Lugalbanda’s sickness/recovery in cave: EPSK 3.2:185–194
b.      Twice Elijah exhibited miraculous speed or travel:
                                                               i.      Elijah also outran Ahab from Mt. Carmel to Tirzah with miraculous speed: "Then the hand of the LORD was on Elijah, and he girded up his loins and outran Ahab to Jezreel." (1 Kings 18:46)
                                                             ii.      The angel of the LORD came again a second time and touched him and said, “Arise, eat, because the journey is too great for you.” So he arose and ate and drank, and went in the strength of that food forty days and forty nights to Horeb, the mountain of God." (1 Kings 19:7–8)
11.  Archeological Provence:
a.       “We know the poems from an ordered variety of tablets. These come overwhelmingly from the Nippur eduba and in smaller numbers from Ur. Their distribution is that of the core material: in nearly all cases we have a few complete editions on large multicolumn (five to six columns per side) single tablets; a few more complete editions composed of multicolumn (three to four columns per side) editions of half or one third of the text; many single column extract tablets (imgida). The writing is almost always small, regular, and careful. There are few mistakes. There are but few alternative spellings and readings. Obvious exercise tablets belonging to the earlier phases of education are conspicuously absent. Furthermore, all four poems are represented in the curricular catalogs, mostly as a group. It follows that the pieces were meant for the scholars themselves and represented the final and highest step in their scribal education. It also follows that these poems, as is also the case with the other members of the core curriculum, were not studied for life, but for schooling, as the Latin saying went, non vitae, sed scholae discimus.” (Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta, H. L. J. Vanstiphout, Jerrold S. Cooper, Vol. 20, p13, 2003 AD)
12.  Intertwining of ancient Sumerian literature with the Bible stories of creation, the flood and the tower of Babel:
a.       In Berossus' flood story, "Xisuthrus" (or Sisithrus) is the one who was on the ark during the great flood. His identity is either Noah, Shem, Ham or Jephath. Sisithrus was most likely Ham, given the fact that Ham's grandson was Nimrod who built the tower of Babel and that the flood story of Berossus in takes place in Eridu (Babel).
 
I. Enmerkar as Nimrod:
A. Nimrod and Enmerkar were both born in Ararat:
1.      Nimrod:
a.       Nimrod was born in the northern Mt. Ararat region but migrated south to found Babel in the south:
2.      Enmerkar is twice said to be born in Ararat:
a.       “To him [Enmekar] who grew up on the soil of Aratta” (Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat: EPSK 2:211 and EPSK 2:529)
 
B. Nimrod and Enmerkar were both mighty hunters:
1.      Enmerkar the mighty hunter:
a.       “Enmerkar” literally means “Enmer” the hunter “kar”: ‘Enmer the Hunter’
2.      Nimrod was a mighty hunter = "He was a mighty hunter before the LORD; therefore it is said, “Like Nimrod a mighty hunter before the LORD.” (Genesis 10:9)
3.      Nimrod: The phrase “mighty hunter” most naturally refers to the hunting of animals for food.
a.       While men after the flood were vegans who feared animals, Nimrod showed uncharacteristic fearless bravery in not only hunting animals but also eating them. Nimrod therefore, paved the way for men to starting eating meat and change their diets from vegan to omnivore.
b.      Echoing the bravery and hunting skills of Nimrod, their founder, many ancient Assyrian inscriptions and reliefs of Assyrians kings are pictured as “fearless hunters of animals”.
a.       Moses points out to the children of Abraham at Mt. Sinai that in 3200 BC, Nimrod, second generation from Noah, when the world population was 800, was the first king, the first to be brave and not fear animals but to kill them, the first to eat animals, the founder all the Assyrian cities of their ancestors (Abraham called from Ur) and of course the first to invent pagan gods which created the great historic dichotomy between worshipers of YHWH at Sinai and the “gods of your forefathers beyond the river” they were all familiar with.
4.      Nimrod, as the mighty hunter king, became the proto-type for all Assyrian kings as witnessed in countless reliefs and roller seals of later Assyian kings being called “mighty hunter” and depicted as hunting.
a.       Since Nimrod lived before and after the Tower of Babel, this explains how Nimrod also became the prototype of the great HUNTER KING in Egypt as well!
b.       There is a cylinder seal (Old Assyrian period circa 2,300 BC) of a hero presenting a new king to the moon-god Sin. The early Sumerian writing in front of the head of the hero (thus labelling him) is KAR.NUN which means the ‘Mighty Hunter’. (David Rohl)

 
C. Nimrod and Enmerkar were both former vegans converted to meat-eating:
1.      Enmerkar:
a.       Allusion to the early vegan/meat eating of Nimrod as the first meat eater.
b.      Notice the vegan slur that meat eating humans are like dogs who eat rotten dead animals. In other worlds, only dogs eat meat. ‘Will then truly have cast out Aratta as a carrion-eating dog! [if Enmekar succeeds in bringing a donkey load of grain in nets to Aratta, the lord of Aratta will submit to Enmekar] (Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat: EPSK 2:290)
2.      Nimrod, born in 3225 BC might be identified as the first non-vegan to make meat eating popular 75 years after the flood.
a.       All eight on the ark had lived their life as vegans, never eating meat. For one hundred years before the flood, they had never eaten meat! Like every human alive today, a person’s life long cuisine is highly resistant to change would continue after they exited the ark. While God did tell Noah that they could eat animals, their resistance to actually eating meat might exceed what happens when you take a vegan in for Texas BBQ where the options are chicken, beef and pork!
b.      Identifying Nimrod as a person who ate a large amount of meat in Gen 10 contextually expands upon God’s command to start eating meat in the previous chapter 10: "“The fear of you and the terror of you will be on every beast of the earth and on every bird of the sky; with everything that creeps on the ground, and all the fish of the sea, into your hand they are given. “Every moving thing that is alive shall be food for you; I give all to you, as I gave the green plant." (Genesis 9:2–3)
c.       After the flood, man feared the animals. When God put the “fear of man” in animals, this marked a changed relationship that transformed from a peaceful coexistence where “the lion lays down with the lamb and never harms man” into mutual “dog eat dog” world where man hunted animal and ANIMAL HUNTED MAN. We can be certain this is true because the very next statement is that God decreed death to animals who kill man!!! "Surely I will require your lifeblood; from every beast I will require it. And from every man, from every man’s brother I will require the life of man. Whoever sheds man’s blood, by man his blood shall be shed." (Genesis 9:5) This is why bears, lions and dogs that kill or hurt men today are hunted and killed.
d.      The idea Nimrod was a “mighty hunter of animals” highlights his uncharacteristic bravery in the new post flood world. While other men were terrified of animals and certainly didn’t eat animals, Nimrod was famous for his lack of fear of being killed by the animals and was the first person to eat them!
e.      The association of Nimrod as the first Assyrian king in history who founded all the major Assyrian cities, as a brave, fearless and skilled hunter of animals (while all other men cowered) is confirmed in the many ancient inscriptions of Assyrian, Babylonian and Egyptian kings portray him as a mighty hunter even listing of drawing the animals killed.
 
D. Enmerkar and Nimrod were both kings at Uruk, who founded Uruk:
1.           Nimrod:
a.           "The beginning of Nimrod’s kingdom was Babel and Erech [Uruk] and Accad and Calneh, in the land of Shinar." (Genesis 10:10)
2.           Enmerkar:
a.           Enmerkar is the king of Uruk in the four ancient stories where the king of Ararat submits to him. (ie. Enmerkar and Ensuhgirana; Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta; Lugalbanda 1 & 2)
3.           Enmerkar in the Sumerian Kings list: 2119 BC:

a.           Sumerian King List: “This [Sumerian kings list] is a so-called historiographic document, drawn up during the Isin-Larsa period (2017–1763 B.C.E.) or possibly during the Ur III period (2112–2004 B.C.E.).” (Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta, H. L. J. Vanstiphout, Jerrold S. Cooper, Vol. 20, p4, fn11, 2003 AD)
b.          Specific reference to the flood and Cush the grandson of Moses:
                                                               i.      “Then the Flood swept over. After the Flood had swept over, and the kingship had descended from heaven, the kingship was in Kiš. [Kush or Cush]. In Kiš, Gišur became king; he ruled for 1,200 years.” (Sumerian King List)
c.           The Sumerian Kings list preserves Enmerkar as the son of Meš-ki'ag-gašer.
                                                               i.      The Sumerian Kings list states that Enmerkar was “the king of Uruk, who built Uruk, became king; he ruled for 420 years”
                                                             ii.      Surprisingly, this is pretty close to an accurate time period for Nimrod to live.
                                                           iii.      “Enmekar [possibly Nimrod-literally means Enmek the hunter like nimrod who also founded Uruk], son of Meš-ki'ag-gašer, the king of Uruk, who built Uruk, became king; he ruled for 420 years.” (Sumerian King List, Weld-Blundell Larsa Prism, ends with Sin-magir, 2119 BC)
                                                           iv.      After Enmerkar lived Gilgamesh of the famous flood story: The Epic of Gilgamesh (1150 BC)! “Gilgameš, whose father was an invisible being, the lord of Kulaba, ruled for 126 years. Ur-Nungal, son of the divine Gilgameš, ruled for 30 years.” (Sumerian King List, Weld-Blundell Larsa Prism, ends with Sin-magir, 2119 BC)
 
E. Nimrod and Enmerkar both share the same consonants in cuneiform and Hebrew: “NMR”
1.      Nimrod = NMR-D [Hebrew] = “rebeller”. (verb)
2.      Enmerkar = NMR [cuneiform] = “Enmer the Hunter” (noun)
 
F. Etymology of Mt. Ararat = Aratta in the four stories
1.      Both are spelled identically in Cuneiform. (Matthew Glassman, email, 2019)
2.      “Aratta = biblical Ararat = Assyrian Urartu = Uru-Mania = classical Armenia. Both language wise, and geographically/historically. If you are asking for a further suggestion, you might want to consider that the first element of Ararat is Ar/Ur which has the meaning ’settlement’ and later ‘city’ (as in Ur of the Chaldees and Urushalayim). Similarly, Urartu is a later rendition of Ur-Aratu. So Ar-Arat could be ’settlement or city of Arat[ta]’. This would be the multi-coloured walled city mentioned in the Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta text.” (David Rohl, text, 2019)
 
G. Nimrod and Enmerkar were both eyewitnesses to the confusion of languages in 2850 BC
1.      Nimrod:
a.       Nimrod was an eyewitness to the tower of Babel (2850 BC) at age 375 years old.
b.      All other men at this period in history live to be around 500 years old. Gen 11
c.       Nimrod was born around 3225 BC and died around age 500 in 2725 BC
d.      The origin of writing was triggered BECAUSE OF the confusion of languages at Babel.
e.      Men would draw pictures of known things as an aid to communicate.
f.        Pictographic communication is archeologically validated in the earliest forms of cuneiform, Egyptian hieroglyphs and Chinese languages.
2.      Enmerkar: (EPSK 2:144–155)
a.       The stories express a longing for the restoration of one language again as was in the recent past.
b.      “For man will then have no enemy. On that day the lands of Šubur and Hamazi, As well as twin-tongued Sumer—great mound of the power of lordship— Together with Akkad—the mound that has all that is befitting— And even the land Martu, resting in green pastures, 145 Yea, the whole world of well-ruled people, Will be able to speak to Enlil in one language! For on that day, for the debates between lords and princes and kings Shall Enki, for the debates between lords and princes and kings, For the debates between lords and princes and kings, 150 Shall Enki, Lord of abundance, Lord of steadfast decisions, Lord of wisdom and knowledge in the Land, Expert of the gods, Chosen for wisdom, Lord of Eridug, Change the tongues in their mouth, as many as he once placed there, 155 And the speech of mankind shall be truly one!’” (Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat: EPSK 2:144–155)
c.       The second story: “The poem tells of a time when there is no fear or rivalry among men and describes how with “one tongue” (language) all the countries worship the high god Enlil.” (New American Commentary, Genesis 11)
 
H. Nimrod and Enmerkar were both eyewitnesses to the invention of writing in 2850 BC
1.      Nimrod:
a.       Nimrod lived before and after the tower of Babel (2850 BC)
b.      Nimrod was born around 3225 BC and died around age 500 in 2725 BC
c.       Nimrod lived past the historic archeological validated beginning of writing around 2850 BC.
2.      Enmerkar:
a.       Enmerkar’s Invention of writing after the tower of Babel took place in the south where Nimrod was king.
b.      Writing was invented in the south, not in the north near Ararat.
c.       His [Emnerkar] speech was very grand, its meaning very deep; The messenger’s mouth was too heavy; he could not repeat it. Because the messenger’s mouth was too heavy, and he could not repeat it, The lord of Kulab patted some clay and put the words on it as on a tablet. Before that day, there had been no putting words on clay; 505 But now, when the sun rose on that day—so it was: The lord of Kulab had put words as on a tablet—so it was! Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat: EPSK 2:500–506
d.      “O lord of Aratta, when you have read this tablet, learned the gist of the message” Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat: EPSK 2:525
e.      “The lord of Arratta took from the messenger. The tablet (and held it) next to a brazier [fireplace]. The lord of Aratta inspected the tablet. The spoken words were mere wedges—his brow darkened. The lord of Aratta kept looking at the tablet (in the light of) the brazier.” Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat: EPSK 2:537–541
f.        “It can no longer be doubted that the Sumerians, after giving humankind the most precious technological and cognitive tool ever invented, namely, writing, by that token gave us the first highly articulated system of literature. The poems translated here, as we have them, are some four thousand years old, and they still impress us with their clever and agile structure, with their consummate mastery of a highly stylized and poeticized language that was already obsolete if not extinct when they were composed, with their lively and multifaceted stylistic tactics, with their deft handling of many-layered imagery, and with their sheer exuberance in rhetoric.” (Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta, H. L. J. Vanstiphout, Jerrold S. Cooper, Vol. 20, p15, 2003 AD)
g.       “On the other hand, as will be discussed below, the poems show no sense of time perspective: the times of Enmerkar are in many ways pretty much identical to the times of the conception of the stories, the passage describing the invention of writing (including its basic economic rationale) suggests remote antiquity.(Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta, H. L. J. Vanstiphout, Jerrold S. Cooper, Vol. 20, p4, 2003 AD)
 
I. Nimrod and Enmerkar both built the First shrines built at Eridu (Babel) and Eruk:
1.      Nimrod: “the rebeller”: inventor of Sumerian pagan gods:
a.       The entire system of pagan gods was a fabrication of Nimrod and date back to before the tower of babel.
b.      The series of pagan shrines at Eridu (Babel of Nimrod) that have been excavated validate this.
c.       The ancient story in “Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat” records that the first pagan shrines were in fact built in Babel of Nimrod!
2.      Enmerkar built the first pagan temple from mud bricks and bitumen:
a.       The “Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2” records a constant contrast between Aratta (northern kingdom of Ararat) that has no shrine and Eruk (Eruk of Nimrod) which has a brick built Kulab (temple)!
                                                               i.      Shrine in Uruk but not at Aratta: “For Inana did the lord of Aratta don his golden crown and diadem, But he did not please her as well as did the lord of Kulab, For nothing even resembling the shrine Eana [main temple of Inana in Uruk], or the Gipar, the holy place, Did Aratta ever build for Holy Inana, unlike brickwork Kulab!” (Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat: EPSK 2:28–32)
b.      “Who had her installed as the divine Queen of the Eana! ‘O lord, Aratta shall bow in deep submission!’ “This she has promised in brick-built Kulab!” (Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat: EPSK 2:233–235)
c.       The nimrod temple is called: the brickwork! he stepped into Kulab, the Brickwork. (Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat: EPSK 2:299)
d.      “This great mountain range [Aratta] is a MES-tree grown high into the skies” (Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat: EPSK 2:243)
 
II. Mount Ararat in Ancient Sumerian cuneiform inscriptions:

 
A. Graphical replication of the twin peaks of Ararat:
1.      Shamash, the sun god depicted between twin peaks:

a.       From archeology, we know that the sun god "Shamash" lived in between the twin peaks of Mt. Mashu where Ut-napištim lives.
b.      Shamash, the Akkadian sun god, stepping through the mountains at dawn with rays springing from his shoulders; cylinder seal impression, ca. 2400 BCE.
c.       Notice that the written language symbols for "Shamash" in Cuneiform, Chinese and Egyptian all show a god living between two mountain peaks.
d.      The association with the sun god and the kingdom of Aratta (Ararat), which is where the first kingdom existed after the flood, is significant!
 
B. Mt. Ararat in the Epic of Gilgamesh: Mt Nimush and Mt. Mashu:
2.      A very high mountain:
a.       Noah’s ark rested on the highest mountain because after the ark landed, no other mountains or dry ground were visible. People who propose other lower candidate mountains for Mt. Ararat overlook this critical Bible fact.
b.      Mt. Ararat is the highest mountain peak in the entire middle east.
c.       “The mountain is called Mashu. Then he reached Mount Mashu, which daily guards the rising and setting of the Sun, above which only the dome of the heavens reaches, and whose flank reaches as far as the Netherworld below, there were Scorpion-beings watching over its gate.” (Epic of Gilgamesh, Tablet 9)
d.      “The mountain is called Mashu. Then Gilgamesh reached Mount Mashu [seeking Ut-napištim who was in the ark” (Epic of Gilgamesh, Tablet 9)
e.      Gilgamesh said to Urshanabi, the ferryman: "Go up, Urshanabi, onto the wall of Uruk and walk around. Examine its foundation, inspect its brickwork thoroughly-- is not (even the core of) the brick structure of kiln-fired brick, and did not the Seven Sages themselves lay out its plan! (Epic of Gilgamesh, Tablet 11)
3.      Mt. Nimush = Mt Ararat 5300 meters elevation: Ark rested on this mountain
a.       Noah’s Ark Rested on Mt. Nimush
b.      Mt. Nimush: [Sumerian: “N-MSH”]
c.       Mt. Mashu where the flood survivor, Ut-napištim lives.
d.      “On Mt. Nimush the boat lodged firm, Mt. Nimush held the boat, allowing no sway. One day and a second Mt. Nimush held the boat, allowing no sway. A third day, a fourth, Mt. Nimush held the boat, allowing no sway. A fifth day, a sixth, Mt. Nimush held the boat, allowing no sway. When a seventh day arrived I sent forth a dove and released it. The dove went off, but came back to me; no perch was visible so it circled back to me. I sent forth a swallow and released it.” (Epic of Gilgamesh, Tablet 11)
4.      Mt. Mashu: Smaller peak of Mount Ararat. (the smaller twin)
a.       Mt. Mashu literally means "twin". Mt. Mashu is the twin peak beside Mt. Ararat.
b.      [Sumerian: “MSH”]
c.       Home of Ut-napištim (who was in the Ark)
d.      Both Mt. Ararat and Mt Mashu are twin-mountains.
5.      Distance between Mt. Ararat and Mt. Mashu: 12 leagues in a mystic travel tunnel of darkness led by scorpion demons:
a.       Gilgamesh arrives at the foot of Mt. Ararat (Mt. Mashu) and tells a guardian scorpion what he wants: "I have come on account of my ancestor Ut-anapishtim, who joined the Assembly of the Gods, and was given eternal life. About Death and Life I must ask him." The scorpion grants Gilgamesh full access to the "Mashu mountains", which are the twin peaks of Mt. Ararat. The scorpion guides him through a long, scary, dark tunnel into the mountain that opened up to a beautiful garden with precious stones at Mt. Mimush.
b.      The distance between Mt. Ararat and Mt. Mashu where Ut-napištim lived was “Twelve leagues he traveled and it grew brilliant [at Mt. Mashu]” (Epic of Gilgamesh, Tablet 9)
c.       Mt Nimush is the mountain that the ark rested upon and Mt. Mashu is the twin peaked mountain (Ararat) where Ut-napištim's home is located. You must enter a tunnel at the foot of Mt. Nimush and travel “12 leagues”
d.      12 leagues = 120,000 cubits @ 22.6 inches, = 2,712,000/12 inches = 226,000 feet = 70 km from Mt Ararat to Ut-napištim's home on Mt. Mashu “twin mountain”.
e.      This is a mystical journey not to be taken literally as 70 km because a demon-scorpion led Gilgamesh in total darkness in a kind of “travel-tunnel portal – wormhole”.
f.        So, Mt. Nimush is Mount Ararat is the 17000 foot mountain where the ark of Noah landed and the twin is Mt. Mashu, the lower peak beside Mt. Ararat where Ut-napištim lived.
6.      “Let Ut-anapishtim [ie. his relatives-seed] reside far away [ie. Uruk], at the Mouth [Persian Gulf] of the Rivers [Tigris & Euphrates]. They took us far away and settled us at the Mouth of the Rivers." (Epic of Gilgamesh, Tablet 11)
 
C. Mt. Ararat in Enmerkar vs. Aratta:
1.      Ararat described as a very high mountain:
a.       “This mountain range is a warrior, tall and fierce” Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat: EPSK 2:268
b.      “It is I [king of Aratta], being the lord proper for the lustrations, ‘I, whom the great neck-stock of heaven, the Queen of Heaven and Earth, ‘The goddess of the myriad powers, Holy Inana ‘Brought to Aratta, the mountain of the inviolate powers; ‘I whom she made block the entrance to the highlands as a great door! 225 ‘Why then should Aratta submit to Unug? ‘There can be no submission of Aratta to Unug! Tell him that!’” (Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat: EPSK 2:220–226)
2.      Location of Aratta and Terrain between Aratta to Uruk:
a.       The trip from Uruk to Mt. Ararat starts out in lowlands but enters a series of mountain ranges near Lake Van, which is a perfect fit for the “crossing 7 mountain ranges”.
b.      The story has the messenger making 7 return trips between Unub and Aratta over 7 mountain ranges. While this is a literary device, it is most likely that the 7 trips were created to match the factual 7 mountain ranges between Uruk near the Persian Gulf and Mt. Ararat.
c.       “From the foot of the highlands, through the mountain ranges, to the plains, From the far border of Anšan to the upland of Anšan He crossed five, six, seven mountain ranges. Enmerkar’s Seige of Ararat #1: Lugalbanda’s sickness/recovery in cave: EPSK 3.2:342–344
d.      “Furthermore, the lord gave these instructions to the messenger Who was to go to the highlands, to Aratta: “Messenger, at night, run swiftly as the south wind; “At daybreak, rise like the dew!” 160 The messenger heeded the words of his king. At night he journeyed by starlight; By day he traveled with the sun in the sky. Whither and to whom should he carry the grave word of word-wise Inana? He carried it up into the Zubi range; 165 He carried it down from the Zubi range. Šušin and the land of Anšan Saluted her humbly, like small mice. In the great mountain ranges the teeming multitudes Groveled in the dust before her. 170 Five, six, seven mountain ranges he crossed, And when he lifted his eyes, he had arrived in Aratta. Overjoyed he stepped into the courtyard of Aratta” (Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat: EPSK 2:156–172)
e.      “The threefold series of challenges and replies going to and fro between Unug and Aratta works out naturally at a total of seven journeys, since the series starts at Unug but ends in Aratta and is not merely a sequence of challenge-and-response: the responses carry their own challenges. The messenger also has to travel over seven mountain ranges. This is a fine instance of the very sophisticated interpretation or reuse of a common folktale technique.” (Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat: EPSK 2:171, fn22)
 


Were the pyramids built before the Flood?

According to Creation scientists,

the Great Flood in Noah's day

occurred in about 2350 B.C.

And then the Tower of Babel event

would have occurred sometime after that,

and then the Great Pyramids of Giza

would have been built sometime after that.

But, according to Egyptologists,

the Pyramids of Giza were built about 2550 B.C.,

about 200 years before the Flood.

But, wait a minute now,

how could the Egyptians have built the

Pyramids a whole 200 years

before the Flood,

when the nation of Egypt didn't even

EXIST until AFTER the Tower of Babel?

That doesn't make any sense.

The Great Pyramids do not have any signs

of water damage.

If the pyramids were built before the Flood,

and are still standing after the Flood,

then that would mean the pyramids

would have been completely submerged

in the flood waters

and SHOULD have a significant amount

of water damage...

But they don't.

The Great Pyramids do NOT have

a significant amount of water damage.

And so,

since Egyptian history

pre-dates Noah's Flood

and continues on, after the Flood,

unaffected by it,

then skeptics say, that either

a world-wide flood never happened...

Or, Biblical history must be inaccurate.

"This is, uh... this is heavy duty, Doc."

However, the pyramids are built on top of

sedimentary layers, which contain fossils.

Creation scientists say that these layers

were laid down during the Flood,

which is evidence that the pyramids

would have been built AFTER the Flood,

not before it.

Also, the name "Egypt" in Hebrew

is "Mizraim."

Mizraim is the son of Ham

and the grandson of Noah.

So clearly, the Egyptians are the

descendants of Noah's grandson.

But Noah didn't even

BEGIN to have grandsons until

AFTER they stepped off the Ark.

So clearly,

Egyptian history

could NOT have begun

until AFTER the Flood.

So, instead of questioning

Biblical history,

it makes more sense to

question Egyptian history.

"Is Egyptian history really accurate?"

Well,

according to an award-winning documentary

called, "Patterns of Evidence: the Exodus,"

some scholars believe that

Egyptian history has been dated incorrectly

and needs a MAJOR adjustment.

Experts like John Bimson and David Rohl

believe that Egyptian history

needs to move forward on the timeline

by about 200 years.

And the documentary shows

some compelling evidence

supporting this claim.

And when you correct the inaccuracies

on the Egyptian timeline,

then all of the sudden,

Egyptian history lines up perfectly

with the events of the Exodus.

This documentary is the winner of

13 film festival awards,

and was the #1 best selling documentary

on Walmart and Amazon for two weeks

in a row.

It's also available on iTunes

and on Netflix.

Now, if these experts are correct,

that Egyptian history needs to move

forward on the timeline by 200 years,

then this would mean that the pyramids

would NOT have been built about 2550 B.C.

But rather, they would have been built

about 200 years AFTER that,

about 2350 B.C., making the pyramids

contemporary with the Flood in Noah's day.

So that solves the problem, right?

Well, no it doesn't.

Because that doesn't leave any time

for the Tower of Babel event

to have taken place.

Also, the Great Pyramids of Giza

are not the oldest pyramids.

The Step Pyramid at Saqqara

is the very first

Egyptian pyramid ever built.

And it pre-dates

the Great Pyramids of Giza

by about 100 years,

which would place the Step Pyramid at

about 2450 B.C.,

which still pre-dates the Flood by about

100 years.

So you see, even when you correct the

inaccuracies on the Egyptian timeline

so that it lines up with the

events of the Exodus,

that still doesn't solve the problem.

The pyramids still pre-date the Flood.

Which MEANS that the only

option left over,

is you have to question the Biblical timeline.

-"Great Scott."
-Doc: "I know, this is heavy."

Now that's not to say that

you should question Biblical authority.

But rather,

"Is the timeline presented by

Creation Scientists, really even Biblical at all?"

Well, according to the Greek Septuagint...

it's not.

What do I mean by that?

Well, let me explain.

You see, in a previous video that I made,

called, "How long were the

Israelites in Egypt,"

I pointed out the fact that

modern translations are translated from

the Hebrew Masoretic text,

which is not the original Hebrew.

But rather, it's a COPY of the Hebrew,

called the Leningrad Codex,

which was copied in the 11th century A.D.

But the Greek Septuagint was

translated more than 1,000 years before,

in 250 B.C.,

and would NOT have been

translated from the Hebrew Masoretic.

But rather, it would have been translated

from a DIFFERENT copy of the Hebrew,

an OLDER copy which is

no longer around today.

The Samaritan Pentateuch ALSO pre-dates the

Masoretic text and would also have

referenced an older copy of the Hebrew.

The same is true for the writings of

Flavius Josephus and of Paul the Apostle.

And according to these four witnesses,

the original Hebrew text said that the

Israelites were in Egypt AND Canaan

for 430 years.

And that's the way that Exodus 12:40

was written in the original Hebrew.

But more than 1,000 years later,

when the Hebrew Masoretic text was copied,

that phrase, "And Canaan,"

was dropped out of the text.

And since all of our Bibles are translated

from this corrupted copy of the Hebrew,

then all of our Bibles say that the Israelites

were in Egypt for 430 years,

which is incorrect

and mathematically impossible.

The truth is, they were in Egypt for only

HALF that time, for 215 years.

If you don't know what I'm talking about,

then I suggest you watch this video, first.

Now, what I didn't explain in this video,

is the fact that this is not the only thing

that the Masoretic has dropped out.

There are other things the Masoretic text

has dropped out causing major distortions

in the Biblical timeline.

And these distortions make it seem like

the Pyramids were built before the Flood.

Let me explain.

You see, in Genesis Chapter 11,

it gives a genealogy from Shem

all the way down to Abram.

And it says how old each person was

when the son was born.

So it says that

Arphaxad was 35 when his son was born,

and Shelah was 30 when his son was born.

but in the Greek Septuagint

It says that Arphaxad was 135.

And it says that

Shelah was 130.

The Greek Septuagint has an extra 100 years

on those ages.

In the six generations from Arphaxad

down to Serug,

The Hebrew Masoretic text says that

they were in their 30s

when their son was born.

But the Greek Septuagint says that

they were in their HUNDRED and 30s.

The Greek Septuagint has an extra 100 years

on each one of those ages.

But it's not just the Greek Septuagint,

The Samaritan Pentateuch includes those

extra hundred years

and so does Flavius Josephus.

Now remember,

the Bible says, "By the mouth of

two or three witnesses,

every word shall be established."

Well, we've got three witnesses here,

that are on 100% agreement that the

original Hebrew text

included those extra 100 years.

on those ages from Arphaxad down to Serug.

And we already know that

these three bear witness that

the original Hebrew text included that phrase,

"And Canaan,"

when the Masoretic text has dropped it out.

Now let me explain why I think

that these extra hundred years belong.

And it has NOTHING to do with the Pyramids.

But rather,

it has to do with the Bible itself.

You see, if you take these ages

that are in the Hebrew Masoretic text

and you plot these on a chart,

then you'll notice something really strange.

You'll notice that Shem would have outlived almost

all of his sons and grandsons,

down to the eighth generation.

Now I've heard it said before,

that the loss of a child is considered to be

the worst possible grief.

-"You're going to be alright. You're g..."

[overcome with grief]

(to himself): "God help me."

[overcome with grief]

♪ (daunting music) ♪

Well, if this is really true,

that the loss of a child is the worst possible grief,

Well, then Shem

must have gone through

a whole lot of grief.

Because according to the Hebrew Masoretic text,

Shem would have witnessed the death of his son.

(sound) "Ah!"

He would have witnessed the death

of his grandson.

(sound) "Ah!"

He witnessed the death of

his great-great-grandson,

(sound) "Ah!"

his great-great-great-grandson,

(sound) "Ah!"

his great-great-great-great grandson,

(sound) "Ah!"

his great-great-great-great-great grandson,

(sound) "Ah!"
and, his great-great-great-great-great-great grandson.

(sound) "Ah!"

Now, why would God put

Shem through so much grief?

And, what's causing this anyway?

I mean,

I understand that Shem lived

before the Flood,

but why would that make him like a Superman

AFTER the Flood,

outliving almost all of his sons

and grandsons,

down to the eighth generation?

It doesn't really make a lot of sense.

♪ (heroic music) ♪ 
♪ "Shem Man" ♪

But according to these three witnesses,

the original Hebrew text

included an extra hundred years

on those ages

from Arphaxad down to the Serug.

And when you put those extra hundred years

back onto those ages,

and you plot the rest of this chart

according to the ages that are

in the Greek Septuagint,

then all the sudden,

everything makes perfect sense.

Shem died before his son.

Arphaxad died before his son.

Shelah died before his son.

Each generation died in succession:

one after the other.

Which is NORMAL for a genealogy.

Any normal child, with average intelligence,

who reads the genealogy in Genesis 11,

is going to get the impression

that the fathers were dying before the sons.

That's the way of life.

That's the impression that the Scriptures give.

And according to these three witnesses,

that's exactly the way that it happened.

-"Hello? Hello? Anybody home?"

-"Huh? Hey, think McFly. Think."

And so, according to these three witnesses,

and a little common sense,

the original Hebrew text

included an extra 100 years on those ages,

from Arphaxad down to Serug.

But more than a thousand years later,

when the Hebrew Masoretic text was copied,

those extra hundred years were

dropped off of those ages.

-"Erased... from existence."

And since all of our Bibles are translated

from this corrupted copy of the Hebrew,

then all of our Bibles are MISSING

those extra hundred years,

which has grossly distorted our understanding

of the Biblical timeline.

-"Obviously,"

-"the time continuum has been disrupted"

-"creating this new,"

"temporal event sequence"

"resulting in this alternate reality."

-(McFly): "English, Doc."

Now Creation scientists, like Kent Hovind,

have put together a longevity chart

from Adam to Joseph.

And in this chart,

he has Shem out living almost

all of his sons and grandsons.

And he says that Shem would have

known Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

-"You won't notice this reading your Bible either."

"But when you graph out the dates,"

"it's like, 'Wow, that's pretty cool.'"

"Noah's son Shem lived long enough"

"after the Flood to know Abraham,"

"Isaac and Jacob."

"You know if you're 130,"

"but you know a 600-year old"

"that lives around the corner,"

"You just don't feel so old anymore."

But the truth is,

Shem died about 500 years

before Abraham was even born.

Shem could not have personally known

Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,

which explains the lack of dialogue

between them.

Answers in Genesis

made a book about Noah's Ark.

And in that book, they have a timeline.

And in that timeline,

They have Shem dying AFTER the birth of Abraham.

Sorry, but that's not correct.

Shem did not die after the birth of Abraham.

Shem died about five hundred years

BEFORE the birth of Abraham.

Answers in Genesis ALSO gets it wrong.

-(sound effect): 
(Super Mario Bros. "Game Over")

When Creation scientists say that the Flood

occurred about 2350 B.C.,

They're basing this primarily

upon the calculations of James Ussher.

But James Ussher based his calculations

upon the genealogies that are

in the Hebrew Masoretic text.

But, according to these three witnesses,

the original Hebrew text included

an extra 100 years on those ages

from Arphaxad down to Serug.

And when you put an extra hundred years

back onto six generations,

then that adds an extra 600 years

of history

In fact,

there's also an issue with the seventh generation;

With the age of Nahor.

The Hebrew Masoretic text says

that Nahor was 29 years old

when his son was born.

But the Greek Septuagint says that

he was 79.

The Samaritan Pentateuch

also agrees that he was 79,

whereas Flavius Josephus never specifies.

Well, that's at least two witnesses right there.

So take 79 and subtract 29.

And that's an extra 50 years of history!

Meaning, that the original Hebrew text

included an extra 650 years of history.

Which means that the Flood would

NOT have occurred about 2350 B.C.

But rather,

it would have occurred

about 650 years BEFORE that.

about 3,000 B.C.

-"Great Scott!"

"And now, I may have seriously altered history..."

And so, if the Flood occurred about 3,000 B.C.

And the Step Pyramid at Saqqara

was built about 2450 B.C.

Well, then there's no legitimate reason to be

looking for water damage on the pyramids.

The pyramids were NOT submerged

in the flood waters,

because at the time when the Flood occurred,

the very first Egyptian pyramid

would not be built

until another 550 years into the future.

Not hundreds of years in the past.

-"...well, it's all in the past."

-(McFly): "You mean the future?"

-(Doc): "Whatever!"

This would explain why the Pyramids

are built on top of sedimentary layers,

which were laid down during the Flood.

Also, 550 years is plenty of time

for the world to repopulate,

for the Tower of Babel event, and for

nations to have spread all over the earth.

You see,

atheists sometimes say that

there wasn't enough time for the

Tower of Babel event to have taken place

and for nations to have

spread all over the Earth.

The reason why atheists say this is

because most Creation scientists

are in agreement that

the Tower of Babel event occurred

just before the birth of Peleg.

You see,

the Bible says that the

name Peleg means, "Divided."

And it says that his father named him this,

"for in his days, the earth was divided."

Well, at the time when they were building the tower,

they were all living in the same place.

And they were all speaking the same language,

meaning that the Earth was united.

But, in the days of Peleg,

the Earth was divided,

meaning that it was, "not united."

This is a very clear indication

that his father named him this

just AFTER the dispersion at Babel,

when God confused the languages

and they all split off in their own

separate directions.

In fact,

Peleg's father is Heber,

sometimes written as Eber,

and Heber witnessed the events at Babel.

Heber was there when it happened.

And when Heber and his family split off

in their own separate direction,

they were speaking their own language.

They were speaking the language of Heber,

which is why it's called the "Hebrew" language,

because it's named after him.

-"I'm writing this down. This is good stuff."

So clearly the Tower of Babel event

occurred within the lifetime of Eber,

just before the birth of his son, Peleg.

Flavius Josephus says,

"Sala was the son of Arphaxad;"

"and his son was Heber,"

"from whom they"

"originally called the Jews Hebrews."

"Heber begat Joctan and Phaleg;"

"he was called Phaleg,"

"because he was born"

"at the dispersion of the nations"

"to their several countries."

for Phaleg,

among the Hebrews,

signifies division.

♪ (swoosh) ♪

♪ (ding) ♪

Well, according to the Masoretic Text,

there was only about a 100-year time period

in between the Flood and Noah's day

and the birth of Peleg.

Apparently,

atheists have done the math

and have decided that a hundred years

was not enough time

for the population

to have grown from eight people

to a large enough number,

in order to build the Tower of Babel.

After all,

if the Great Pyramid of Khufu

required 30,000 workers,

well then surely,

the Great Tower of Babel

would have required

many more workers than that.

But you simply cannot

get THAT many workers

in only a hundred years,

even if you go with

a very generous growth rate of 3.2 percent,

which is the growth rate of some of

the most fastest growing countries

in our world today,

and you start with the eight people,

who came off the Ark.

Then, in a hundred years,

you'd only end up

with about 186 people.

186.

That's it.

That is simply not enough people

to build a city with an enormous tower.

I may not be an expert on

population growth rates,

but I'd say these atheists have a

pretty valid argument.

However,

according to these three witnesses,

the original Hebrew text

included an extra hundred years on those ages

from Arphaxad down to Serug.

And when you put those extra hundred years

back onto those ages,

then you'll find there's about a

400 year time period

in between the Flood and Noah's day,

and the birth of Peleg.

I think that 400 years

is plenty of time

for the population to have

grown to a large enough size,

in order to build the Tower of Babel.

After all,

if you go with the exact same

growth rate of 3.2%,

and you start with the eight people

who came off the Ark,

then in 400 years,

you'd end up with about 2.3 million people.

if the largest pyramid

only required 30,000 workers,

well then I think 2.3 million people

is enough to build the Tower of Babel.

And so,

if our Bibles were consistent with

the original Hebrew,

well then atheists would not have

made this claim to begin with.

In order to go from 8 people to 30,000 people

in only a hundred years,

you need a growth rate of 8.58%.

However,

this is NOT a realistic growth rate.

Just to put this in perspective for you,

if you go with an 8.58% growth rate,

and you start with the eight people

who came off the Ark,

then in 400 years,

you'd end up with

159 trillion people.

Okay,

there's not even ONE trillion people

alive on Earth today...

thousands of years later.

You're not going to get

a 159 trillion people

in only four hundred years.

Clearly,

an 8.58% growth rate is not realistic

and yet,

that's the kind of growth rate

that you would need

in order to get 30,000 people

in only 100 years.

So CLEARLY,

the original Hebrew text

included those

extra hundred years in those ages,

from Arphaxad down to Serug.

Now if the Tower of Babel event occurred

about 400 years after the Flood,

well then, that still leaves about a

150-year time period

in between the dispersion at Babel,

and the building of the

very first Egyptian pyramid.

I think that 150 years is plenty of time

for the descendants of Mizraim

to have left the land of Babel

and to have arrived in the land of Egypt.

And so,

when you understand Biblical history correctly,

and you understand Egyptian history correctly,

then, all the sudden,

everything makes perfect sense.

But this only works

IF you follow the original Hebrew,

not the corrupted Hebrew Masoretic.

-"It works."

-"It works!!!"

Also, Creation scientists say that

the world is about 6,000 years old.

But this is based upon

the genealogies that are in the

Hebrew Masoretic text.

But, if the original Hebrew text

included an extra 650 years of history,

then this would take the age of the earth

up to at least 6,650.

Meaning that the world is closer to

being 7,000 years old,

NOT 6,000 like Creation scientists claim.

Now, please don't think that

the Greek Septuagint is perfect.

It's not perfect.

For example,

in Genesis Chapter 11

You may have noticed that

the Greek Septuagint includes an extra

"Cainan" in between Arphaxad and Shalah.

The Book of Luke, Chapter 3

in the genealogy of Jesus,

also includes this extra "Cainan"

in between Arphaxad and Sheila.

This extra "Cainan" does not belong.

The oldest known copies

of the Greek Septuagint

do NOT include this extra, "Cainan."

Only newer copies do.

The oldest known copies of

the Book of Luke

do NOT include this extra "Cainan."

Only NEWER copies do.

The Samaritan Pentateuch does NOT include it.

Flavius Josephus does NOT include it.

The Hebrew Masoretic does NOT include it.

Even 1 Chronicles 1:18,

does NOT include it,

in either the Greek or the Hebrew.

This extra Cainan was added in

to newer copies of the Greek,

when it should NOT have been.

So you can just ignore

this extra Cainan, here.

It doesn't belong.

And I did not include

that extra Cainan in this chart.

So in case you're wondering

why it's not there,

now you know.

The question is, though, is

"Why would the Jewish Scribes

drop those years off of those ages?"

Why would they do that?

Was it on purpose, or was it an accident?

And if it was on purpose,

then what was their motive?

Well, I think that it WAS on purpose, and

I think that their motive

was to disprove what the

Book of Hebrews says

about Jesus being the New High Priest.

You see,

the Book of Hebrews says

that Jesus is the New High Priest.

Now, any Jewish person knows

that in order to be a priest,

you HAVE to come from the Tribe of Levi.

But Jesus didn't come from Levi,

He arose from the Tribe of Judah.

And priests don't come

from the Tribe of Judah.

So, according to the law,

Jesus cannot be the New High Priest.

But the Book of Hebrews says that Jesus

IS the New High Priest.

NOT according to the Levitical priesthood,

but according to a DIFFERENT priesthood.

According to a HIGHER priesthood.

According to the Order of Melchizedek.

Now the Book of Hebrews says something

really interesting about Melchizedek.

It says that he had

no father and no mother.

No genealogy.

No beginning of days, and no end of life.

Apparently, Melchizedek must be some sort

of a divine or immortal being.

Perhaps like one of the sons of God

talked about in Genesis, Chapter 6.

Whatever the case,

the Book of Hebrews says that Jesus

IS the New High Priest,

NOT according to the fleshly commandment,

but according to the power of an endless life.

Now, Jewish rabbis have decided that

they would disprove what

the Book of Hebrews says about Melchizedek

by claiming that Melchizedek

is the same person as Shem,

the son of Noah.

Now with Shem,

we know who his father and his mother were.

It was Noah and his wife.

We know what his genealogy is

because it's recorded in Genesis.

We know he had beginning of days

and end of life,

because we know when he was born

and when he died.

And so, by saying that

Shem is the same person as Melchizedek,

that would disprove what

the Book of Hebrews says ABOUT Melchizedek.

Not only that,

but this would mean that Melchizedek

is not of a different,

or a higher, priesthood.

But rather,

he would be the ancestral founder

of the Levitical Priesthood.

Rabbis say that Shem

handed the priesthood down to Abraham,

who then handed it down to Isaac,

and then to Jacob

and eventually down to Levi.

This would mean that Melchizedek

is of the SAME priesthood,

NOT a DIFFERENT one.

And rabbis say that the only way

for Jesus to be the New High Priest,

according to the Order of Melchizedek,

is he would have to

inherit that priesthood from Levi,

just like Levi inherited the

priesthood from Melchizedek.

But since Jesus is not a descendant of Levi,

then Jesus cannot be the New High Priest.

And this is the argument that

Jewish rabbis use,

even to this day.

-"Unlike Christianity,"

"our tradition tells us who was Melchizedek."

"He wasn't an angel or God, Himself,"

like the Christians teach,

but, was actually Shem,

the son of Noah,

"who transferred the title of priest"

"over to Abraham,"

"and then on through Isaac, Jacob, Levi,"

"and ultimately Aaron."

Now the problem with this argument, though,

is that Melchizedek

lived the same time as Abraham.

Melchizedek interacted with Abraham,

Melchizedek brought out

bread and wine to Abraham

and Abraham gave Melchizedek a tithe of all.

But Shem died

about five hundred years before

Abraham was even born.

How did Shem bring out

bread and wine to Abraham,

when he had been dead for

the past five hundred years?

Clearly Shem cannot be

the same person as Melchizedek.

There's about a 500 year gap in there,

preventing them from being the same person.

And so it appears that a long time ago,

some Jews decided to conspire

with the scribes

and have them drop those years

off of those ages.

That way they could distort the genealogy

in such a way

to where the lifetime of Shem

now overlaps the lifetime of Abraham.

This way,

they can say that Shem

lived the same time as Abraham

and then begin to promote the idea

that Shem is the same person as Melchizedek.

-"It's all an illusion."

♪ (scientific electrical sounds) ♪

-"Pay no attention to that man behind the curtain."

In fact,

if you ever read an article

that says that Shem IS Melchizedek,

you'll notice that the only evidence

that they provide

is they'll say,

"Look at the genealogy."

"Shem lived the same time as Abraham."

Okay...

But, where's the rest of the evidence?

They might quote the Book of Jasher,

or the Targum,

or some commentary by a rabbi,

but those aren't Scripture.

Where's the scriptural evidence

that clearly says that Shem IS Melchizedek?

There isn't any.

Now, those years were not necessarily

dropped out in the 11th century,

when the Leningrad Codex was copied.

They might have been dropped out

in an earlier copy of the Masoretic.

In fact,

they might have been dropped out

in a copy of the Hebrew

that dates all the way back

to the days of Paul the Apostle.

And IF that's the case,

then that might be why Paul warned

Titus and Timothy not to get involved in

foolish arguments and disputes

about... genealogies.

In order to give heed to...

Jewish Fables.

Now, what is Paul talking about here?

Why would the Jews want to argue

with Christians about genealogies?

Hmm...

Maybe it's because they

distorted the genealogies

in their attempt to disprove Christianity.

And maybe that distorted genealogy

is the one and only

single piece of evidence

that even remotely supports

this ridiculous, anti-Christian fable

that Shem is the same person as Melchizedek,

and therefore

Jesus can't be the New High Priest.

Maybe THAT's what Paul was talking about...

So you see,

not only do we have evidence

that those years were dropped out,

but now we know of a motive

as to why they would WANT to drop them out.

And that's why I suspect

that this is not just some

accidental copyist error,

like when the Greek Septuagint

includes an extra "Cainan."

No, I suspect,

that the Jewish Scribes

dropped out those years

ON purpose...

with the intent to deceive.

-"No."

-"It wasn't me."

"It was the one-armed man!"

-"All right, I confess."

-"I did it you hear!"

-"And I'm glad. Glad! I tell ya!"

As a matter of fact,

in 1947,

there were some ancient Hebrew scrolls

that were discovered in some caves

on the outskirts of the Dead Sea;

Known as the "Dead Sea Scrolls."

These are hundreds of fragments of

ancient Hebrews scrolls

that were carefully pieced together

and dated all the way back to the

second and third centuries B.C.,

more than a thousand years

before the Masoretic Text was copied.

Now unfortunately,

Genesis, Chapter 11

was not found in the Dead Sea Scrolls.

But,

whenever the Greek Septuagint

and the Hebrew Masoretic text disagree,

the Dead Sea Scrolls

USUALLY side with the Greek Septuagint

more OFTEN than with the Masoretic.

Like in Psalm 145, for example.

Paul the Apostle quotes the Old Testament

more than a hundred times

in the New Testament.

And whenever the Greek and the Hebrew diverge,

Paul usually sides with the Greek Septuagint.

Like in Galatians 3:17,

which I pointed out in a previous video.

And not just Paul,

but other disciples, as well.

Take Stephen the Martyr, for example.

In Acts 7:14,

Stephen the Martyr says

that when Jacob and all of Israel

went down into Egypt,

they consisted of 75 people total.

In case you didn't notice,

Stephen the Martyr is agreeing with the Greek.

You see in the Hebrew Masoretic text,

in Genesis 46:27,

it says that when Jacob and all of Israel

went down into Egypt,

they consisted of 70 people total.

Exodus 1:5 also says 70 people total.

But, in the Greek Septuagint,

it says that they consisted of 75 people total.

Exodus 1:5 also says, 75 people total.

So which was it?

Was it 70?

Or was it 75?

Well, Stephen the Martyr says, in Acts 7:14,

that they consisted of 75 people, total.

Stephen the Martyr

agrees with the Greek Septuagint;

Not the Hebrew Masoretic.

Now, why would Steven do that?

After all,

didn't Steven know Hebrew?

OR did the Hebrew text back THEN

say something different?

That's where the Dead Sea Scrolls come in.

In 1947,

they found these ancient Hebrew scrolls

that predate the Masoretic text

by more than a THOUSAND years.

And in the Dead Sea Scrolls,

they found Exodus, Chapter 1, verse 5.

And guess what it said.

It said that Jacob

and all of Israel consisted...

of seventy-FIVE people, total.

The Dead Sea Scrolls

provide UNDENIABLE evidence

that when Stephen the Martyr

sides with the Greek Septuagint,

it's NOT because he's disagreeing

with the Hebrew.

It's because he

IS agreeing

with the ORIGINAL Hebrew.

Even Jesus Himself,

sides with the Greek Septuagint.

In Luke, Chapter 4,

Jesus quotes a passage of Scripture

from Isaiah 61,

where He says,

"The Spirit of the Lord is upon Me,"

"Because He has anointed Me"

"To preach the gospel to the poor."

In this passage of Scripture,

Jesus uses the phrase,

"And recovery of sight to the blind."

If you look up Isaiah 61

in the Greek Septuagint,

then you'll find that it includes that phrase,

"And recovery of sight to the blind."

But if you look it up

in the Hebrew Masoretic text,

then you'll find that that phrase

is completely missing from the text.

And since all of our Bibles are translated

from this corrupted copy of the Hebrew,

then all of our Bibles

are missing that phrase...

from Isaiah 61.

But even Jesus Himself,

confirmed that it's in the original Hebrew.

Even Jesus Himself,

sides with the Greek Septuagint.

When atheists say that Egyptian history

predates Noah's Flood,

they think that

they're disproving the Bible.

But they're not.

They're simply pointing out an error

in the Hebrew Masoretic text.

But even Jesus and his disciples

discredit the Masoretic text

from time to time.

You see,

they're ASSUMING that the Biblical date

for the Flood was 2350 B.C.

But, according to these three manuscripts,

it's not.

So if they're right,

that Egyptian history predates THAT,

then, this actually

VERIFIES the testimony

of these three manuscripts,

and therefore CONFIRMS the accuracy

of the ORIGINAL Hebrew

from which Jesus and his disciples were quoting.

♪ (reflective music) ♪

"There are errors that we know about. Why?"

"Because we can compare the documents."

"We can compare the manuscripts"

"and see where the errors are."

Let's say you have...

Here's the original,

which we don't have,

we don't...

at least we don't think we have,

any original documents, okay?

So they're all copies.

Okay?

And, let's say you find four different copies.

And in the first copy,

you see an error right here.

And then on another copy,

there's another error right there.

In the third copy,

there's another error right there.

And in the fourth copy,

there's an error right there.

Can you reconstruct the original?

(audience) "Yes."

Yes. And that's what scholars do.

So yes, sometimes scribes made mistakes,

but in virtually all cases,

we know what the mistake was

and we can correct it by comparing it

with other documents.

Now, you might say,

"Why wouldn't God just...

if this is true..."

"Why wouldn't He just maintain the original?"

If I had the original,

what could I do to it?

I could alter it, right?

But if you had a copy,

you had a copy, you had a copy,

you had a copy,

you had a copy, you had a copy,

and I had a copy,

and I changed my copy...

Is everyone going to know

who changed their copy?

Yeah,

because when you get all your copies together

and compare it to mine,

you go, "Turek, you heretic."

"Why did you do that?"

Right? So by NOT

preserving the original...

you ACTUALLY

are able to PRESERVE the original better.


Introduction
1.        The Septuagint chronology is original and the Masoretic chronology was corrupted by the Jews at Zippori in 160 AD
a.         The correct Septuagint chronology says that Noah died in 2948 BC, hundreds of years before Abraham was born in 2166 BC
b.        The corrupt Masoretic chronology says Noah died in 2168 BC, 58 years after Abraham was born in 2166 BC. In other words. Abraham was 58 years old when Noah died but this is certifiably wrong. Jewish tradition, based upon the corrupt Masoretic chronology, has long viewed Shem as Melchizedek, who died when Jacob was 50. The correct Septuagint chronology says that Shem died in 2796 BC, hundreds of years before Jacob was born in 2006 BC. Again, this Jewish tradition is impossible to reconcile with the flood, Tower of Babel, population dynamics and the archeology of Dynasty 0 of Egypt and the first pyramids in 2650 BC.
2.        The sacred inspired text tells us Noah lived 350 years after the flood but died in 2948 BC.
3.        The flood is a historical event known to all ancient men because the four couples who were on the ark populated the entire earth.
4.        This is why the oldest archeology on earth records several different flood stories that have spectacular parallels with the true Genesis account. These include the Sumerian Eridu Genesis: (2150 BC) the Akkadian Epic of Atra-Hasis (1635 BC) and Babylonian Epic of Gilgamesh (1150 BC) These and the 500 other "flood stories/myths" that are found in every corner of the earth, are what you would expect given the fact of Noah's Ark and the global flood. The best candidate from the one who was on the ark in these flood stories would be Ham, the grandfather of Nimrod who build the tower of Babel.
5.        There is evidence from both archeology in China and word pictures embedded in the Chinese language, that Noah moved to China and may have been the first emperor.
 
A.    The Bible is a direct revelation from God through man: "Inspired"
1.      When 2 Tim 3:16 says, "All scripture is inspired by God" the word inspired means literally in the Greek: "God Breathed". The 66 books of the Bible were written by God, revealed by the Holy Spirit through the hands of men.
2.      The Bible is the only book on earth that is inspired by God. There are two classes of books on earth: 1. Books that contain the word of man and 2. Books that contain the word of God. The 66 books of the Bible therefore are in a distinct and unique category from any other book on earth.
"For this reason we also constantly thank God that when you received the word of God which you heard from us, you accepted it not as the word of men, but for what it really is, the word of God, which also performs its work in you who believe. " (1 Thessalonians 2:13)
3.      To understand the process of inspiration, think of man as being a pen in the hand of God in a kind of dictation process like a court recorder. A court recorder writes down exactly what is said by another and no changes can be made. A pen has no say over what will be written on paper, but God holding the man in His hand as a pen. The personal writing style, vocabulary and sentence structure of each of the 40 authors of the Bible are unique in same way a person can pick up different types of pens with their own unique scripts. It is important to understand that God chose each and every word that the authors wrote in a style that was natural to themselves. However the final result was exactly what God wanted written, with no direct input from the man doing the writing. Therefore, man was not like a news reporter who witnesses a divine event, then sits down and from his own personal creativity, writes a report. Instead, man often had no personal knowledge of the divine event and the Holy Spirit revealed it through them.
"So we have the prophetic word made more sure, to which you do well to pay attention as to a lamp shining in a dark place, until the day dawns and the morning star arises in your hearts. But know this first of all, that no prophecy of Scripture is a matter of the prophet's own interpretation, for no prophecy was ever made by an act of human will, but men moved by the Holy Spirit spoke from God. " (2 Peter 1:19-21)
4.      When you read the Bible, it is God speaking to you through the pages that were written by men:
"Then the LORD stretched out His hand and touched my mouth, and the LORD said to me, "Behold, I have put My words in your mouth. " (Jeremiah 1:9)
5.       All the Bible Stories are true and real history like: six literal 24 hour day creation, Adam and Eve, Noah's Ark, the Tower of Babel as the origin of languages, the exodus from Egypt, the crossing of the Red Sea, Jonah spending three days in the belly of a whale, Daniel surviving a furnace of fire, the resurrection of Jesus and the miracles of the apostles.
6.       Here you reading this right now and you must make a decision: Will I believe the Bible and find the secret to eternal life or will you reject the Bible to your eternal doom? We won't make your decision for you, we merely provide information so you can make the decision yourself.


When you get the chronology right, the cartography right and the archaeology right, you will get the Bible text right. What you read in the book you find in the ground! Let’s dig up another Bible story!
 
This is the Bible account of the origin of civilization after the global Noahic flood. Archaeology indicates that the Tower of Babel closely resembled the Stepped Pyramid of Djoser at Saqqara in Egypt. Although excavations at biblical Babel (Tel Abu Shahrain = Eridu) have not found any evidence of the Tower itself, there is evidence of the 300 x 300 meter square elevated platform upon which the Tower of Babel was going to be built. The city of Eridu (Babel) and the platform were abandoned for 750 years until Ur-Nammu built a Ziggurat upon the vacant platform in 2100 BC.
 
Scripture dates creation to 5554 BC and the Flood to 3298 BC using the Septuagint. Eight Bible markers in Genesis 10-11 decode the date of the Tower of Babel to around 2850 BC. The founding principle of Christian Archaeological Dating (CAD) is that there is no Archaeology older than the flood which marks the beginning of the earliest Archaeological Stone ages including: Paleolithic, Neolithic and Chalcolithic. Archaeological assemblages excavated at Tepe Gawra provide evidence that the earliest Archaeological ages were concurrent not consecutive. Pre-flood Human civilization is encased in a 2 km layer Noahic flood deposit of sedimentary rock laid down in a few months as seen in the geology of the Grand Canyon.
 
During this earliest period of post-flood civilization, “rebel” Nimrod plays a key and central role in almost every area. The identity of Nimrod is unknown, but he is best represented by the character of Enmerkar in Sumerian literary sources. Ancient Jewish, Christian and secular literary sources unanimous record that Nimrod built the Tower of Babel. It is chronologically impossible for Nimrod to be Sargon I of Akkad (~2300 BC). It is unlikely that God would allow idol worshippers on the Ark, therefore it was likely Nimrod who fabricated a new complex pantheon of pagan gods to worship like the supreme Anu who decreed the flood and his children Enlil, Enki and Inana. It will be shown using 20 direct parallels between the “rebel” Nimrod and the god Enki that Nimrod seems to have invented Enki as a “god in his own image”. In Sumerian flood stories, Enki was the rebel god who warned “Noah” to build an ark because An and his son Enlil sent a flood to wipe out mankind. The Gilgamesh flood story records mankind’s anger towards the supreme god who decreed the flood and portray him as unjust, impatient and evil. Enki, the son of An, is portrayed as a savior/hero of mankind for warning Noah of the decree and instructing him to build the ark. This hostility is surfaces in the scene where all the gods are invited to Noah’s incense offering except An and Enlil.
 
Nimrod’s first mudbrick temple at Eridu (Babel) was dedicated to Enki, as was his Tower of Babel, as was the Ziggurat of Ur-Nammu in 2100 BC at Eridu. In Sumerian myths, it was Enki who caused the division of languages (Gen 11) at Eridu (Babel). Nimrod satisfied the human need to worship by inventing and/or promoting a complex hierarchy of pagan gods, idols and temples. These were the “gods beyond the river” that Moses and Joshua warned about. Nimrod won over the people, not through violence but through improved living conditions, better technology and idol worship. Under Nimrod, food was mass produced in bread factories using Bevel Rim Bowls to feed workers, the first trade routes were established, the first mudbrick temples were built and fine pottery was made. Contrary to popular opinion, the earliest pottery after the flood was finely made bichrome ware with intricate designs. After the Tower of Babel, when the Early Bronze Age I (EB I) began, the quality of pottery is noticeably reduced with the exception of Khirbet Kerak Ware in the Levant.
Noah and his sons founded a kingdom in the Mt. Ararat region as the world population grew from 8 to 800 men during the first 100 years after the flood. Nimrod, second generation from the flood, was born in the northern Ararat Kingdom around 3225 BC. Being a rebel, he migrated south in 3200 BC and founded Babel (Eridu), Uruk and Ur (Gen 10:10). Archaeological excavations at Biblical Babel (Eridu) were conducted in the 1940’s have been re-evaluated by Christian Archeologists with some stunning results! From these 80 year old excavations, we now know that Nimrod likely built his first pagan temple in 3200 BC. Temple XVII (3x3 meters) was dedicated to the god Enki at Eridu (Babel) which featured a niched altar room in which to place an idol of Enki and a burnt offering table for Goatfish (carp) in the middle of the room (see book cover). From 3200 – 3000 BC Nimrod would build at Eridu 9 temples (XVII-IX) one on top of the other in increasing size and complexity as the world population grew from 800 people in 3200 BC to 300,000 in 3000 BC. Immediately following the division of languages at the Tower of Babel, the first written languages are invented (while Nimrod was alive) by employing pictograms to communicate. The earliest Sumerian cuneiform, Egyptian Hieroglyphs and Chinese symbols were pictographic.
 
In the first 450 years from the flood down to the Tower of Babel, Archaeology has demonstrated an older culture being replaced by a new culture, not once, but twice. First, we see the founding “post flood” Halaf culture of the Northern Ararat kingdom of Noah’s sons, being suddenly replaced by the Ubaid culture of Nimrod’s southern kingdom in 3000 BC during the Ubaid 3 Expansion Archaeological Age. This occurred when Nimrod founded Nineveh (Gen 10:11). Second, after the Tower of Babel in 2850 BC, Archaeology demonstrates an explosion of urbanism during the Uruk 3 Expansion Archaeological Age, when the confusion of languages caused men to disperse to the corners of the earth in Gen 11.
 
Immediately after the Tower of Babel is when some of the oldest cities in the world were founded on virgin soil or small populations were swarmed by a new wave of mass migration. Cairo was founded around 2850 BC by sailing south on the Persian Gulf then back up the Red Sea to the Gulf of Suez and migrating west. In 2660 BC Pharaoh Djoser built the oldest pyramid in the world (Stepped) and the oldest stone temple in the world at Saqqara. This temple in Egypt is an architectural mirror of Nimrod’s Temple VI at Eridu (Babel). Peru was founded around 2850 BC by sailing down the Persian Gulf, following the ocean currents around the Horn of Africa and across the Atlantic Ocean, then west through Panama (submerged by much higher ocean levels), then south to Peru. In 2600 BC the Peruvians built one of the oldest Pyramids in the world. Jerusalem, Jericho and El-Beidha (En-mishpat, Kadesh, Petra) were founded around 2850 BC when migrants followed the Euphrates north, then travelled down the coast.
 
Abraham left Ur the very year that Ur-Nammu begins construction of two almost identical Ziggurats at Ur and Babel in 2100 BC. The Ziggurat at Ur was a temple to Nanna the moon god. The Ziggurat at Babel (Eridu) was built upon Nimrod’s 300x300 meter platform for the Tower of Babel that lay abandoned for 750 years. In 2850 BC, Nimrod had tried to build the Tower of Babel, which was a pagan Temple to Enki but God caused construction to be stopped by the division of languages. In 2100 BC, Ur-Nammu began to construct his own “ziggurat version” of Nimrod’s ancient Tower of Babel as a pagan temple of Enki. The year construction begins of the two ziggurats at Babel and Ur, God calls Abraham out of Assyria to Canaan.
 
II. The four storylines in Enmerkar vs. the king of Ararat (Ararat “RRT”= city “R” of Aratta “RT”)
1.      Submission of Ararat to Uruk #1: Enmerkar vs. Ensuhgirana [EPSK 1]
a.       After a boasting match between two kings as to who is the idol goddess Inana’s preferred sexual partner, followed by competing wizardry spells and counter-spells to cause and break famine in Urek, Ensuhgirana the king of Ararat submits to Enmerkar king of Uruk.

b.       “In the days when Enmerkar rules over the splendid and awesome city of Unug, the lord of Aratta, Ensuhgirana by name, claiming to be the recipient of Inana’s favors, demands Enmerkar’s submission to Aratta. Enmerkar refuses, pointing out that it is obvious that he himself is Inana’s true and constant lover. The lord of Aratta apparently admits that he has been beaten in this part of the game, but, although criticized by his own people, he in turn refuses to submit to Unug. A sorcerer from Hamazi offers his services to break the stalemate: he claims to be able to bring Unug to submission. The lord of Aratta accepts the offer. The wizard travels to the city of Ereš, where he casts a spell on the cattle of the goddess Nisaba. They stop giving milk, and there is famine in Sumer. A cowherd and a shepherd implore the sun god, who sends a wise woman. She catches up with the wizard on the banks of the Euphrates. They start a competition in magic. Five times the wizard throws fish spawn in the river and draws out an animal; five times the wise woman draws out another animal, which catches the wizard’s animal and presumably eats it. Then the wise woman accuses the wizard of black magic, since his magic is draining away the life force of Sumer. He admits that he has been beaten at his own game and pleads for his life. She refuses, takes away his vital force, and thus reenlivens the city of Ereš. Upon hearing this, the lord of Aratta admits defeat and submits to Enmerkar.” (Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta, H. L. J. Vanstiphout, Jerrold S. Cooper, Vol. 20, p23, 2003 AD)

 

2.      Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat [EPSK 2]
a.       The great trade dispute: Ensuhgirana the king of Ararat refuses to supply the new rival king Enmerkar (Nimrod) with precious metals and stones needed to build Uruk. As in the first story [EPSK 1], Enmerkar demands the submission of Ararat because the goddess Inana (Venus) prefers to go to bed with Enmerkar. This time, however, Inana sends a message through Enmerkar to Ensuhgirana the king of Ararat that she indeed prefers Enmerkar and therefore must supply the trade goods. In a kind of “Battle of Wits”, like in the Princess Bride, the ranking king of Ararat creates three unsolvable challenges for Enmerkar, which of course, he solves. Enmerkar supplies two reasons why Ensuhgirana the king of Ararat must submit to his authority, become a vassal king and send the gold and precious stones. First, Enmerkar points out that he is the first one to build a mud brick temple to the pagan goddess in Uruk and that there is no temple building anywhere else in the world including the kingdom of Ararat. Here the Nimrod = Enmerkar synchronism strongly supports that Nimrod was a rebeller, not only for political insurrection to human powers, but for being the first person to invent and propagate an entire pantheon of idol gods. To the Hebrews at Mt. Sinai in 1446 BC, Nimrod’s Assyrian pagan gods were in fact “the gods of your fathers beyond the river”.  Second, Enmerkar argues that he invented the first written form of language on earth i.e. cuneiform. He wishes for the world to be restored like it was before the Tower of Babel when all men spoke a single language. In the end a dog fight is proposed to determine who is the top king but Inana herself then orders Ensuhgirana the king of Ararat to both submit and trade with the uprising fledgling kingdom of Enmerkar in the south.


 

b.       “The story seems deceptively simple. Enmerkar, king of Unug, wants to embellish his city and the whole of Sumer with precious metals and stones- goods that are not to be found in Sumer but only in the fabulously wealthy city Aratta, which lies behind the mountains. Since trade does not as yet exist, he asks the goddess Inana what he should do: Inana is the goddess of Aratta as well. She favors Enmerkar and advises him to send a messenger with a challenge to Aratta, requisitioning what he wants and enforcing his claim by stating that she favors him. He does so, but the (unnamed) lord of Aratta refuses, claiming that Inana is his goddess as well and that anyway his mountain city is an impregnable fastness. Still, he is willing to enter into a contest with Enmerkar in order to see whose side Inana is really on. This results in a counterchallenge that takes the form of an unsolvable riddle: if Enmerkar succeeds in carting grain to Aratta in open nets instead of bags, he might reconsider. Enmerkar finds a solution: he uses sprouting barley to close the interstices of the nets so that no grain is spilled. Sending off the grain, he repeats his challenge. This time the lord of Aratta asks him to bring him a scepter made of no existing material. Enmerkar solves this riddle as well: he prepares a gluelike plastic substance that he pours into a hollow reed; after this mass has hardened, which takes a long time, he breaks away the reed mould and sends off the scepter with a renewed challenge. Finally, the lord of Aratta requests a dog of no known color to fight his own dog. Enmerkar again finds a solution: he weaves a cloth of no known color. When this is sent off to Aratta the messenger complains that the message has become too long and difficult for him to remember and reproduce. Thereupon Enmerkar invents writing—which throws the lord of Aratta in despair. At this point Iškur, the god of storm and rain, intervenes, and the famine and drought that was scourging Aratta at the time is over. The fight between the two dogs now appears as part of a festival. Inana reappears, confirms her predilection for Enmerkar, but also tells him to institute peaceful trade with Aratta from now on.” (Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta, H. L. J. Vanstiphout, Jerrold S. Cooper, Vol. 20, p49, 2003 AD)

3.      Enmerkar’s Siege of Ararat #1: Lugalbanda’s sickness/recovery in cave [EPSK 3]
a.       These two stories revolve around Enmerkar’s son Lugalbanda. Again, Ensuhgirana [named in EPSK 1] the northern king of Ararat refuses to submit to the southern kingdom of Enmerkar at Uruk. Lugalbanda joins the army in marching from Uruk to Mt. Ararat but becomes sick along the way. He is left in alone in a cave with provisions to die. He begs to be healed and offers four successive prayers to the sun god, moon god, star god and once again to the sun god. All the god’s gather with him for a feast and they heal Lugalbanda so that he can now travel north to join the siege the city of Aratta (Urartu = Ur-Artu = Ur of Aratta. Note: Ur = city as in Ur of Chaldees = City of the Chaldeans]. Here we see the narrative invoking the memory of when city walls had first been built, which indicates the story is after the tower of Babel. At the feast of gods a group of competing gods arrive and a battle between “darkness and light” ensues (in reality a battle of darkness and darkness). After the opposing gods are defeated, Lugalbanda begins to travel to join the military siege at the mudbrick city wall of the capital city of the King of Ararat.

b.       “Enmerkar of Unug [Eruk] wants to conquer Aratta. During the march, Lugalbanda (his son?) falls mortally ill and is abandoned in a cave in the mountains. He prays to the great luminaries, who save his life. Being all alone, he reinvents fire, cooking, and baking. He captures a wild bull and a wild goat. Acting on a portentous dream, he sacrifices these animals to the great gods. A band of spirits arrives. The hero masters them with the help of Utu. There seems to follow a battle between the forces of light and the forces of darkness. The former seem to win this battle.” (Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta, H. L. J. Vanstiphout, Jerrold S. Cooper, Vol. 20, p97, 2003 AD)


 

4.      Enmerkar’s Siege of Ararat #2: Lugalbanda’s miraculous speed: Ararat to Uruk [EPSK 4]
a.       In a continuation of the first installment, Enmerkar’s son Lugalbanda, now healed by the gods in the cave begins to travel to join the military siege of his father at the mudbrick city wall of the capital city of the King of Ararat. On route he gains the favour of the mythical Anzud bird by feeding its chicks and is granted miraculous powers of speed-travel. After arriving at the siege, which lasted a year without success, he uses his new found super speed to run alone, back to the mudbrick temple of Inana at Uruk to ask for her help. Ensuhgirana [named in EPSK 1] the king of Ararat submits to Enmerkar without bloodshed.

b.       “Lugalbanda is now stranded in the highlands. He decides to go and look for the Anzud bird, who rules over that region. He feasts Anzud’s chick so well that it is stuffed with food and probably asleep when its parents return from foraging; therefore, it does not answer their call. The frightened parents are very happy when Lugalbanda appears and tells them what has happened. Anzud rewards him with the gift of superhuman speed. He returns to his companions, who are laying siege to Aratta. To force a decision, Enmerkar sends Lugalbanda back to Unug in order to ask for Inana’s advice. In a single day Lugalbanda reaches Unug, and Inana gives her advice. Aratta seemingly submits peacefully.” (Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta, H. L. J. Vanstiphout, Jerrold S. Cooper, Vol. 20, p97, 2003 AD) 

 

III. Introduction to Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta
1.      Dating of these four stories: 2100 BC

a.       “There is little doubt that the cycle [i.e. collection of 4 poems] originated in the Ur III period (2112–2004 B.C.E.), but the actual form of the texts and the tablets themselves date almost exclusively from the Isin-Larsa period (2017–1763 B.C.E.) and are products of the scribal schools, predominantly those of Nippur and Ur.” (Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta, H. L. J. Vanstiphout, Jerrold S. Cooper, Vol. 20, p1, 2003 AD)

b.      Both Nimrod and Enmerkar lived second generation from the flood.

c.       “All the stories make a point of setting the happenings in a definite period: the glorious reign of Enmerkar of Unug [Eruk]. According to the Sumerian King List, the dynasty to which he belongs was the second one after the flood, and thus it antedated the presumed composition of our texts by at least some seven thousand years [~700-1000 years]. But more important is the additional notice in that same document: the entry explicitly says that he is “the one who built Unug. [Eruk]” The stories themselves point this out in their introductory parts and even in the substance of the story (in ELA) or in some important passages (Enmerkar’s plea to Inana at the end of LB II). Thus the stories are set in the greatest of heroic times, when the city was first built.” (Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta, H. L. J. Vanstiphout, Jerrold S. Cooper, Vol. 20, p4, 2003 AD)

d.      “The story of Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta begins in legendary times, before many of the inventions of civilization — such as written communication by letter. Enmerkar ruled in Uruk as “priest-king” (EN), and was the human husband of Inanna, with whom he united yearly in the rite of the sacred marriage. The lord of Aratta ruled in the fabled city of Aratta which lay in the mountains far away to the east. He also was the spouse of Inanna with the responsibilities for the city’s prosperity. But Inanna, we are told loved Enmerkar best.” (COS, Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta 1.170, Vol 1, p547, 1997 AD)

e.      In the Sumerian King List, 2nd dynasty may correspond to simply father son rule, since each would live 500 years with many father/son coregencies inbetween.


 

2.      Archaeological Provence:

a.       “We know the poems from an ordered variety of tablets. These come overwhelmingly from the Nippur eduba and in smaller numbers from Ur. Their distribution is that of the core material: in nearly all cases we have a few complete editions on large multicolumn (five to six columns per side) single tablets; a few more complete editions composed of multicolumn (three to four columns per side) editions of half or one third of the text; many single column extract tablets (imgida). The writing is almost always small, regular, and careful. There are few mistakes. There are but few alternative spellings and readings. Obvious exercise tablets belonging to the earlier phases of education are conspicuously absent. Furthermore, all four poems are represented in the curricular catalogs, mostly as a group. It follows that the pieces were meant for the scholars themselves and represented the final and highest step in their scribal education. It also follows that these poems, as is also the case with the other members of the core curriculum, were not studied for life, but for schooling, as the Latin saying went, non vitae, sed scholae discimus.” (Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta, H. L. J. Vanstiphout, Jerrold S. Cooper, Vol. 20, p13, 2003 AD)

3.      Overview Summary of the theme and plot of the four stories:

a.                   The Rise of king Nimrod as told in the four Enmerkar vs. Aratta stories:

                                                               i.      The theme of all four Enmerkar vs. Aratta stories is the submission of the older northern kingdom at Mt. Ararat to the younger new kingdom of Enmerkar at Uruk.

                                                             ii.      “The “Matter of Aratta” is the somewhat anachronistic term used for a group of four narrative poems2 in Sumerian, dealing with the various ways in which King Enmerkar, the legendary ruler of Unug—the Sumerian name for Uruk (biblical Erech, now Warka)—won supremacy over the faraway, fabulous, and fabulously rich legendary city of Aratta. Together with the Sumerian cycle of Gilgamesh tales, the Aratta stories constitute what may be called, anachronistically again, the Gesta Urukaeorum—or the Legends of the Kings of Uruk. These kings, who represent just two or three generations, appear in the Sumerian King List—an ideological document probably drawn up in the eighteenth century B.C.E. and purporting to be historical—as the second dynasty after the flood.” (Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta, H. L. J. Vanstiphout, Jerrold S. Cooper, Vol. 20, p1, 2003 AD)

                                                           iii.      “The legendary rulers have made Unug/Sumer preeminent among the nations and have laid the foundation, materially and ethically, for its supremacy. The reasons advanced for this superiority, technologically as well as ethically and perhaps even theologically (the support of the gods; the attitude of Inana), may reflect an ideal situation, but they are clearly derived from the actual or supposed situation that obtained during the glorious Ur III period.” (Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta, H. L. J. Vanstiphout, Jerrold S. Cooper, Vol. 20, p13, 2003 AD)

b.                  Nimrod’s (Enmerkar) South vs. North civil war:

                                                               i.      Young upstart King Nimrod’s rise to power requires him to defeat the existing supreme king and ruler of Mt. Ararat.

                                                             ii.      The submission of the kingdom of Aratta (the first post flood government) to the new southern government of Nimrod occurred before the Tower of Babel.

                                                           iii.      The setting clearly indicates it is post flood and post tower of Babel when the languages were confounded that quickly brought about the invention of cuneiform by Nimrod. We see Nimrod as already having built the first pagan shrine on earth before one existed in Aratta. The story indirectly confirms that Nimrod not only rebelled against his parent’s northern kingdom of Ararat also rebelled against God almighty by fabricating the entire pantheon of pagan gods.

                                                           iv.      New rising power challenges old established power

                                                             v.      Younger children challenge their parents’ authority.

                                                           vi.      New south kingdom challenges the established north kingdom.

                                                         vii.      Sothern cities of Babel (Eridu) and Uruk challenge the northern city of Aratta (Ararat)

                                                       viii.      Poor challenges rich in Ararat.

                                                           ix.      Nimrod’s new idol gods at Eridu vs the established monotheism of Ararat and those alive who were on Noah’s Ark.

c.                   This is a perfect match for the two step Nimrod story of the Bible where a second generation from Noah’s ark becomes a great king:

                                                               i.      Stage 1: Nimrod begins building his kingdom in the southern Land of Shinar at Babel (Eridu) and Uruk (Gen 10:10)

                                                             ii.      Stage 2: Nimrod expands his rule north to Nineveh (Gen 10:11). It is this second expansion described in Genesis Gen 10:11 during which the four stories are set.

4.      Refusal to trade triggered the civil war:

a.       Ararat refuses to send gold, silver and precious stones to Enmerkar (Nimrod).

b.      While the northern (first, original) kingdom at Aratta had an early start in mining minerals etc, Nimrod is seen by them as a rebel for setting up a new kingdom. Nimrod is consequently denied any exported goods to build his new cities of Babel, Uruk, etc.

c.       “Enmerkar, king of Unug, wants to embellish his city and the whole of Sumer with precious metals and stones, goods that are not to be found in Sumer but only in the fabulously wealthy city Aratta” (Epics of Sumerian Kings, Vanstiphout, Vol. 20, p49, 2003 AD)

d.      The 4 stories document the riches of Ararat’s Gold & precious stones they wouldn’t share:

                                                   i.      Kingdom of Ararat refused to share its wealth or even trade with Nimrod in the south

                                                 ii.      “Therefore, Aratta, having packed gold nuggets in leather sacks, and packed them tight with gold dust” (Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: EPSK 2:124–125)

                                               iii.      ‘Therefore, Aratta, having packed gold nuggets in leather sacks, ‘And packed them tight with gold dust, ‘And wrapped the precious metals in bales, ‘And loaded mountain asses with the crates” (Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: EPSK 2:196–199)

                                               iv.      “Let him [lord of Aratta] hold it in his hand like a string of carnelian and lapis lazuli beads; “Let the lord of Aratta bring that to me [Enmerkar]! Tell him that!” (Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat: EPSK 2:345)

                                                 v.      “Artfully work gold and silver for my sake! 40 [Let them cut for my sake] polished lapis lazuli from its block; [Let them work for my sake] the translucent smooth lapis lazuli; [Let them] build [for my sake] the holy mountain in Unug! A temple [descended] from heaven—your place of worship, The shrine Eana—let [Aratta] build that! 45 The holy Gipar, your dwelling, let Aratta artfully adorn its inner chamber for my sake so that I, the beaming youth, may embrace you therein! Let Aratta submit to Unug! Let the people of Aratta 50 Bring down for me the stones of their hills and mountains and build for me the great shrine, erect for me the great abode! For my sake, let them make illustrious the great abode, the abode of the gods!” (Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat: EPSK 2:39–52)

5.      Origin of Trade: Ararat’s trade war with Nimrod resolved:

a.       Inana [goddess] orders the king of Aratta to trade their gold with Enmerkar: “The people of Aratta Have as their task the trading of gold and lapis lazuli And the fashioning of golden fruits and fruity bushes Laden with figs and grapes…; they shall heap up these fruits in great piles; They shall dig out flawless lapis lazuli in lumps; They shall remove the crowns of the sweet reeds, And for Inana, Lady of the Eana, They shall heap them up in piles in the courtyard of the Eana.” (Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat: EPSK 2:618–625)

b.      “Thus the invention of trade, which concludes ELA [Enmerkar vs. Aratta: EPSK 2], is based upon Sumer’s abundant wheat crops with the attendant technology (the first impossible task), its high technology resulting in the fashioning of the scepter from an artificial material (the second task), and the high standard of its textile industry (the last task). These three technological advances represent Unug’s favorable position in the balance of trade: in this way they can have at their disposal the “raw material” (precious stones and metals) Aratta has to offer. But there is more: by the globalization of the use of their language (the Spell of Nudimmud!) and by the invention of writing they also control this international trade. But there is also a moral or ethical aspect to Sumer’s superiority.” (Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta, Vanstiphout, Vol. 20, p9, 2003 AD)

c.       Again, the conflict is solved without bloodshed but negotiation.

6.      Etymology of Aratta = Urartu = Mt. Ararat

a.       Lord of Aratta is the King of the kingdom of Ararat which ruled the world after the flood.

b.      Aratta [RT] and Ararat [RT] are spelled identically in Cuneiform and refer to the same place.

c.       Urartu = Ur-Artu = Ur-Ararat = City of Ararat

d.      Ararat = Ar-Arat = Ur-Arat = Ur-Aratta = Ur [City] of Aratta

e.      “Cuneiform is not alphabetic. Its monolingual. This means that each character expresses a syllable rather than in an alphabet where each character expresses a phoneme (sound). Alphabetical characters express much simpler units and that’s why most alphabets are around 26 characters whereas cuneiform inventories number in the 100s or 1000s.” (Matthew Glassman, Email, 2019 AD)

f.        “Both language wise, and geographically/historically, Aratta = biblical Ararat = Assyrian Urartu = Uru-Mania = classical Armenia. If you are asking for a further suggestion, you might want to consider that the first element of Ararat is Ar/Ur which has the meaning ’settlement’ and later ‘city’ (as in Ur of the Chaldees and Urushalayim). Similarly, Urartu is a later rendition of Ur-Aratu. So Ar-Arat could be ’settlement or city of Arat[ta]’. This would be the multi-coloured walled city mentioned in the Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta text.” (David Rohl, who also proposes Enmerkar as a candidate for Nimrod, Email, 2019 AD)

g.       It is truly puzzling why “Bible trashing scholars” claim that Aratta is “Unknown, probably a mythical, city” and NEVER make the obvious connection between Urartu = Ararat = Aratta = Mt. Ararat.

7.      Immediately after the flood those on the ark, built dwellings near and around Mt. Ararat.

a.       The king of Ararat boasts that the people of Ararat were “special and distinct” BECAUSE they survived the flood: “(On the contrary), the right and left flanks of Aratta— Inana, Lady of all the countries, Protects them when the mighty flood is rising! Its people are distinct from other people; They are a nation Dumuzid selected among the other nations, One that firmly establishes the holy word of Inana! So let now the Wise Dog and the … of Dumuzid lock on to each other. Quick, come, [my] young …! They were steadfast before the flood. After the flood had swept over, Inana, Lady of all the countries, out of her great love for Dumuzid, Sprinkled the water of life over them, And subjected the Land to them!” (Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat: EPSK 2:563–576)

b.      The oldest Archaeology in the world is a 60 km circle around Mt. Ararat.

c.       The natural rulers were the four men who were on the ark.

d.      A dynastic/patriarchal kingdom of Ararat ruled the world and all men were under a single government.

e.      A single clan kingdom was established and as the population grew from 8 to 800 from 3298 – 3200 BC, young Nimrod (25 years old) decided to “rebel” against this dynastic kingdom of Ararat.


 

8.      Events between the Flood and the Tower of Babel were “pre-military warfare times”:

a.       The three challenges for submission in “Enmerkar and the lord of Aratta” are not resolved by war and killing but a “battle of wits”, as in the Princess Bride movie.

                                                      i.      This invokes the historical memory before the Tower of Babel when Nimrod defeated the king of Aratta by peaceful means, not military, given the world population might be in the thousands at this early post ark period.

                                                    ii.      Ancient battles would sometimes be solved by vicarious warriors representing each side. However, as we see in the story of David and Goliath, although the Philistines agreed to submit to King Saul if Goliath lost the fight, they ended up reneging on the oath and ran back to Gath.

                                                  iii.      This is further evidenced in the final challenge that dogs fight to the death rather than human warfare at a time when precious few souls populated the earth.

b.      The Lord of Ararat therefore, challenges a dog fight to solve the problem.

                                                   i.      “My dog will wrangle with his dog so that the stronger one be known. Tell him that! Second, when you speak to him, say also this: He must now stop prevaricating and come to a decision. Those of his city shall walk before him like sheep, and he, like a shepherd, shall follow them. At his coming, the holy mound of lapis lazuli shall humble itself before him like a crushed reed. They shall amass shining gold and silver for Inana of the Eana in the courtyard of Aratta in great piles.” (Submission of Ararat to Uruk #2: Enmerkar vs. Lord of Ararat: EPSK 2:475–485)

                                                 ii.      Notice in the final challenge of the dogs, that Iškur (storm god and son of chief god Enlil) sent the rain upon Aratta. The king of Aratta replies that Inana (god) protects Aratta from the flood. This is a clear reference to the Noahic flood universally believed in by the earliest Sumerians down to the time of Abraham. Key is the statement that Aratta gets special protection (distinct) from other people who are not protected and die. But the falling rain dismisses the final challenge and the two parties are now at peace. Again, this invokes the memory of how non-military means were used before the tower of Babel and shortly after, to form governments.

c.       “For all their cultural pretensions and their avowed aspiration to world domination, there is hardly any sign of xenophobia in these tales. Military glory is spurned and even somewhat ridiculed in at least two of the poems. Instead, the emphasis is on cultural and technical prowess, expressed as the highest form of intelligence and, of course, including writing. Furthermore, they overtly prefer their dominant position to be based on peaceful coexistence, even friendly relations with the outer world, to brute strength. (Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta, H. L. J. Vanstiphout, Jerrold S. Cooper, Vol. 20, p15, 2003 AD)

d.      While the two latter stories (Enmerkar’s Siege of Ararat #1 and #2) have a siege of the newly walled royal capital city of the old kingdom of Ararat, nobody actually is killed. Again the submission of Ararat to Nimrod (Enmerkar) is settled without bloodshed. Also remember that these four stories were composed over 1000 years after the events actually took place, so the “myths” were not always entirely technically accurate although they preserved the feel of the true historic events.

9.      Development of city walls over time historically validated through Archaeology:

a.       Archaeologically, several ancient sites were founded without city walls, but then later, the walls were added. Some sites had two distinct walled cities including separate garbage dumps! This all evidences the confusion of language at Babel where people would start being unable to communicate and hostilities began triggering war and the need for city walls.

b.      In the early stories of Enmerkar vs. Aratta, Ararat is not seen as a city with walls.

c.       The two latter Lugalbanda vs. Aratta stories have brickwork and a city that can be sieged:

                                                   i.      Aratta’s battlements are of greenish lapis lazuli; Its wall and its towering brickwork are bright red; Its bricks are of tinstone” (Enmerkar’s Siege of Ararat #1: Lugalbanda’s sickness/recovery in cave: EPSK 3.2:413–415)

d.      The fruitless and unsuccessful one-year siege of Aratta that had city walls:

                                                   i.      “By the watchtowers of Aratta, Unug and Kulab pitched camp. From the city, javelins were raining down as from a cloud; Slingstones, numerous as the raindrops falling in a whole year, were whizzing down from the wall of Aratta. Days went by and lengthened into months; a whole year passed. The harvest grew yellow beneath the skies. Worrying, they looked at the fields; they grew uneasy. Slingstones, numerous as the raindrops falling in a whole year, Kept falling on the roads. Mountain thorns hemmed them in.” (Enmerkar’s Siege of Ararat #1: Lugalbanda’s sickness/recovery: EPSK 3.2:254–264)

10.  Inana’s (goddess) love for Enmerkar grows cold in old age proving that Nimrod lived long into old age and was a worshipper of the pagan goddess Inana.

a.       In the two earlier Enmerkar vs. Aratta stories, the love of goddess Inana with Enmerkar was hot and passionate.

                                                   i.      Enmerkar and the lord of Aratta both claim to have the best sex with Inana.

                                                 ii.      Enmerkar, however, claims that Inana prefers him and she gives him better love!

b.      In the two latter Lugalbanda vs. Aratta stories, Inana’s love for Enmerkar had grown cold.

c.       Enmerkar recalled the founding of Uruk when Inana madly loved him but now at an age when men today get ED, he questions her love, indicating his youth has passed into old age:

                                                   i.      “Enmerkar, son of the Sun, Spoke harsh words to Inana: Once upon a time my noble sister, Holy Inana, From her bright mountain chose me in her holy heart And made me enter Kulab, the Brickwork. Unug then was a mere marsh, oozing water. Where there was dry land Euphrates poplars grew. Where there was a reed thicket old and young reeds grew together. Enki, king of Eridug, Made me tear out the old reeds and made me drain the water. Fifty years I was building, fifty years I was working [to build Babel and Uruk]. So now, if eventually in all of Sumer and Akkad The Martu, who know no grain, should rise up, There stands the wall of Unug [Eruk], extended across the desert like a bird net! But here, in this place, my power seems to be finished! My troops are bound to me as a calf to its mother. Yet, like a child that hates its mother and leaves the city My noble sister, Holy Inana, Has run back to Kulab, the Brickwork! Could she love her city, yet hate me? She should link the city to me! Could she hate her city, yet love me? She should link the city to me! Should the nu-gig—as happened to the Anzud chick— Reject me in person And abandon me by keeping to her holy chamber, Let her at least bring me back to Kulab, the Brickwork! Only on that day my spear shall be laid aside; On that day my shield shall be broken! Speak thus to my noble sister, Holy Inana!” Enmerkar’s Siege of Ararat #1: Lugalbanda’s sickness/recovery in cave: EPSK 3.2:292–321

11.  Supernatural power to run like Elijah to Tirzah and Mt. Sinai:

a.       In the first Lugalbanda vs. Aratta story, Lugalbanda is granted speed as a reward for feeding the mythical Anzud bird’s chicks.

                                                   i.      Speed was granted to Lugalbanda by a bird called an Anzud. An Anzud is Lion-faced mythical bird; guardian of the mountain ranges between >Sumer and >Aratta.

                                                 ii.      “The strength of running shall abound in your thighs, so that you never tire. “There shall be power in your arms; “Your arms shall stretch wide, your force shall not weaken. “Traveling like the Sun, like Inana, “Like the seven storms of Iškur, “You shall leap like the flame, jump like lightning! “You shall be able to go wherever you choose, “Set your feet wherever you cast your eyes, “Arrive wherever your heart prompts you, “And loosen your sandals only where your heart tells you!” Enmerkar’s Siege of Ararat #1: Lugalbanda’s sickness/recovery in cave: EPSK 3.2:185–194

b.      Whereas the Anzud bird was a myth, twice Elijah exhibited true miraculous speed or travel:

                                          i.      Elijah also outran Ahab from Mt. Carmel to Tirzah with miraculous speed: "Then the hand of the LORD was on Elijah, and he girded up his loins and outran Ahab to Jezreel." (1 Kings 18:46)

                                        ii.      The angel of the LORD came again a second time and touched him and said, “Arise, eat, because the journey is too great for you.” So he arose and ate and drank, and went in the strength of that food forty days and forty nights to Horeb, the mountain of God." (1 Kings 19:7–8)

12.  Intertwining of ancient Sumerian literature with the Bible stories of creation, the flood and the tower of Babel:

a.       In Berossus' flood story, "Xisuthrus" (or Sisithrus) is the one who was on the ark during the great flood. His identity is either Noah, Shem, Ham or Jephath. Sisithrus was most likely Ham, given the fact that Ham's grandson was Nimrod who built the tower of Babel and that the flood story of Berossus takes place in Eridu (Babel).

 
E. Correct translation of Gen 10:9 eliminates Sargon I as Nimrod
1.      The Correct translation of Gen 10:9: “He was a mighty hunter before the LORD; therefore it is said, “Like Nimrod a mighty hunter before the LORD.” (NASB)
2.      Nimrod as Sargon 1st advocates have created a unique “one-up” translation of Gen 10:9 to support their view
a.       Nimrod/Sargon translation: “That one acted irreverently, in order to become powerful on the earth; he became a powerful slaughterer in the sight of Yahweh.”
b.      Notice the change from killing animals to a genocidal murderer of men, which is required and essential for Nimrod to be Sargon I. In fact Nimrod was born about 3225 BC at a time when world population was less than 800 human and such murdering would be extremely unlikely. The four stories of Enmerkar vs. the king of Aratta bear this out in the fact that their conflicts were always solved though non-violent means.
3.      This author checked over 60 English translations of Gen 10:9 in Logos Bible Software and the vast majority of renderings of the passage is best represented in the NASB.
a.       Almost without exception they all read very close to the NASB.
b.      None of the 60 translations came even close to the above new translation proposed by Nimrod/Sargon advocates.
c.       Nimrod/Sargon advocates believe their translation is the “only correct” translation!
d.      In fact, their translation is a mush of possible, but unlikely meanings, at the extreme limits of etymological meaning. We see the exact same thing in the New World Translation of the Jehovah’s Witnesses and their beloved Emphatic Diaglott Greek-English interlinear.
e.      We found one translation that differed slightly, but still did not come close to this new translation: “"He was an overbearing tyrant in JEHOVAH’S sight; wherefore the saying: “Even as Nimrod the overbearing tyrant in JEHOVAH’S sight.”" (Genesis 10:9, HSOT, 1885 AD) What is the HSOT? It is the Helen Spurrell Old Testament and the foreword says this: “Helen Spurrell taught herself Hebrew after her 50th birthday… the translation is made from the unpointed Hebrew; that being the Original Hebrew… with dependence upon the guidance and teaching of the Holy Spirit”.
f.        So, Bible translations agree with the NASB and the only one that differed (HSOT) not only clearly mistranslated the Hebrew, but the translator claimed she was guided by God in her translation. When people who think God talks to them attempt to translate the bible the result is unreliable.
4.      The Greek Septuagint from Codex Vaticanus:
a.       "Cush begat Nimrod. He was the first to be a giant on the earth. He was a mighty hunter before the Lord God; because of this they will say, “As Nimrod was a mighty hunter before the Lord.”" (Genesis 10:8-9, Codex Vaticanus, 325 AD)
b.      The only difference is the deliberate use of the word “giant”, as in 9-foot-tall men.
c.       Philo (AD 50) echoes this translation in that he believed Nimrod was a Giant like Goliath in height (Philo On the Giants 65-67’ Philo Questions on Genesis II 82)
d.      The Book of Enoch was a popular and widely read Jewish apocryphal book from 150 BC down to the Byzantine age that discussed 50-foot giant.
5.      Ancient Jewish Translations of Gen 10:9 dating to AD 225 and AD 900:
a.       "Now Cush begot Nimrod; he started to be a potentate on earth. He was a powerful potentate before the Lord, therefore it is said: Like Nimrod a powerful potentate before the Lord. Now the beginning of his kingdom was Babylon, and Erekh, and Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Babylonia. From that land he went forth to/Assyria and he built Nineveh, and the city of Rehoboth, and Calah. As well as Resen between Nineveh and Calah, which was the great city." (Genesis 10:8–12. The Aramaic Bible, Volume 6: The Targum Onqelos to Genesis, 225 AD)
b.       “Kush begot Nimrod; he began to be a mighty sinner and rebel on earth before the Lord. He was a mighty rebel before the Lord. Therefore it is said: “From the day the world was created there has not been a mighty hunter and rebel like Nimrod before the Lord.” The beginning of his kingdom was Babylon the Great, Edessa, Nisibis, and Ctesiphon, in the land of Pontus. From that land Nimrod went forth and ruled over Assyria, because he did not wish to participate in the scheme of the generation of the Division. So he left those four cities. Therefore the Lord gave him (another) place and he built four (other) cities, Nineveh, Streets-of-the-City, Hadiath,and Talsar, which is built between Nineveh and Hadiath; that is the great city." (Genesis 10:8–12, The Aramaic Bible, Volume 1B: Targum Pseudo-Jonathan: Genesis, 900 AD)
6.      By mistranslating the Hebrew text, Nimrod/Sargon advocates change Nimrod from a mighty hunter of animals to a genocidal man-killing, warrior-king. Their mistranslated text is different from 100% of all other translators and makes the text say something the Hebrew doesn’t support.
a.       The reason for changing “mighty hunter” to “powerful slaughterer” is obvious: Sargon I is not pictured or described as a hunter of animals and this is an attempt to preemptively address this huge problem.
b.      The change the focus from killing animals to killing humans contradicts the archaeological history of the friendly Ubaid Expansion period in 3000 BC.
c.       Archaeologically, history shows Nimrod to be a great organizer into cooperative cities not a killer of the precious few alive at this early post flood history.
d.      Archaeologically, the “Ubaid Expansion” is a perfect match for the Nimrod in Genesis, who is portrayed as the first king in history who kills animals but never men in 3000 BC. Archaeologically, the earliest periods of Ubaid period, down to the Uruk expansion at the tower of Babel, found no objects of war of any kind.
7.      The phrase “mighty hunter” most naturally refers to the hunting of animals for food.
a.       At Mt. Sinai, Moses points out to the children of Abraham that in 3200 BC, Nimrod was second generation from Noah, when the world population was 800. Moses said that Nimrod was the first great king and the first to be brave. Moses implies that Nimrod was the first to have no fear of animals but instead killed and ate them. Moses implies that Nimrod was the founder of all the Assyrian cities of their ancestors such as Abraham who was called from Ur. Moses finally implies that Nimrod was the first to invent/promote pagan gods as the origin of the great historic dichotomy between worshipers of YHWH at Sinai and the “gods of your forefathers beyond the river”, with which they were all familiar.
b.      Nimrod, born in 3225 BC might be identified as the first non-vegan to make meat eating popular 75 years after the flood. All eight on the ark had lived their life as vegans, never eating meat. For one hundred years before the flood, they had never eaten meat! Like every human alive today, a person’s life long cuisine is highly resistant to change and would continue after they exited the ark. While God did tell Noah that they could eat animals, they would initially be resistant to eating meat.
c.       One-hundred-year-old people do not easily change their dietary habits. These habits will be transmitted to the children who will also do not easily change their tastes.
d.      Identifying Nimrod as a person who ate a large amount of meat in Gen 10 contextually expands upon God’s command to start eating meat in Gen 9: "“The fear of you and the terror of you will be on every beast of the earth and on every bird of the sky; with everything that creeps on the ground, and all the fish of the sea, into your hand they are given. “Every moving thing that is alive shall be food for you; I give all to you, as I gave the green plant." (Genesis 9:2–3)
e.      After the flood, man feared the animals. When God put the “fear of man” in animals, this marked a changed relationship that transformed a peaceful coexistence where “the lion lays down with the lamb and never harms man” into mutual “dog eat dog” world where man hunted animal and ANIMAL HUNTED MAN. We can be certain this is true because the very next statement is that God decreed death to animals who kill man!!! "Surely I will require your lifeblood; from every beast I will require it. And from every man, from every man’s brother I will require the life of man. Whoever sheds man’s blood, by man his blood shall be shed." (Genesis 9:5) This is why bears, lions and dogs that kill or hurt men today are hunted and killed.
f.        The idea that Nimrod was a “mighty hunter of animals” highlights his uncharacteristic bravery in the new post flood world. While other men were terrified of animals and certainly didn’t eat animals, Nimrod was famous for his lack of fear of being killed by the animals and was one of the first persons to eat them on a large scale.
g.       The association of Nimrod as the first Assyrian king in history who founded all the major Assyrian cities, as a brave, fearless and skilled hunter of animals (while all other men cowered) is confirmed in the many ancient inscriptions of Assyrian, Babylonian and Egyptian kings who are portrayed as mighty hunters. This tradition began with Nimrod.
h.      The excavation data at Tepe Gawra confirms that Nimrod’s southern kingdom consumed twice as much meat as the Ararat northern kingdom in 3100 BC.


NEXT


how long were the Israelites in Egypt in

Exodus 12:40 it says now the length of

time the Israelite people lived in Egypt

was 430 years and so because of this

movies like the Ten Commandments will

say things like this hard dance you do

old man we've been dancing it for 400

years 400 years we have waited 100 years

in bondage to today after 400 years of

slavery and experts on the topic will

say things like this the Israelites were

there 430 years we have the record in

the Bible who tell us about the

Israelites going into Egypt and living

there for 430 years but if you do the

math you'll find that this is not

mathematically possible you see Moses

was 80 years old when they left Egypt

his father Amram lived to 137 his father

Coe has lived 133 and Kohath was one of

the 66 persons who went with Jacob down

into Egypt now let's just stretch this

out as much as we possibly can let's

assume that Kohath was a newborn baby

when he arrived in Egypt let's assume

that a man was born the year that his

father died and let's assume that Moses

was born the year that his father died

so take 133 + 137 plus 80 and that

equals 350 which means that the amount

of time the Israelites were in Egypt

could have been no longer than 350 years

maximum now more than likely Kohath was

probably not a newborn baby when he

arrived in Egypt

more than likely Moses was not born the

year that his father died and more than

likely Amram was not born the year that

his father died which means that the

amount of time the Israelites were in

Egypt would have been significantly less

than 350 years so why does Exodus 12:40

say the Israelites were in Egypt for 430

years when this is not mathematically

possible the key is found in one of

Paul's letters in Galatians 3:16 and 17

Paul says now to Abraham and his seed

where the promises made and this I say

that the law which was 430 years later

cannot annul the Covenant that was

confirmed before by God in Christ

basically Paul is saying that from the

time the Abraham received the promise to

the time that Moses received the law

there was 430 years who Abraham received

the promise when he entered Canaan when

he was 75 years old then 25 years later

when Abraham was a hundred years old

that's when Isaac was born then 60 years

later

when Isaac was sixty years old that's

when Jacob was born then 130 years later

when Jacob was 130 years old that's when

all of Israel arrived in Egypt so take

25 plus 60 plus 130 in that equals 215

which means that there was 215 years

from the time that Abraham entered

Canaan to the time that all of Israel

arrived in Egypt now Moses received the

law at the same time that they left

Egypt because remember the Israelites

were living in Goshen and then Moses led

them out of Goshen brought them through

the wilderness and brought them to the

sea and that God split the waters of the

sea in half and brought the net in to

Midian which is in Arabia then brought

them to Mount Sinai which is where Moses

received the law and so Moses was either

law at the same time they left Egypt so

Paul is saying that there was 430 years

from this point to this point and

according to the Old Testament there's

215 years from this point to this point

so take 430 years and then subtract 215

years and that equals 215 which means

that the amount of time that the

Israelites were in Egypt was 215 years

215 in Egypt

215 in Canaan 430 total now that is

mathematically possible because 215 is

significantly less than 350 and that's

exactly what the Greek Septuagint says

in Exodus 12:40 it says and thus

adjoining of the children of Israel

while they sojourn in the land of Egypt

and the land of Canaan was 430 years the

Samaritan Pentateuch says the same thing

it says now the sonority of the children

of Israel and of their fathers which

they had dwelt in the land of Canaan and

in Egypt was 430 years Flavius Josephus

says they left Egypt 430 years after a

forefather Abraham came into Canaan but

215 years only after Jacob removed into

Egypt Flavius Josephus is saying the

exact same thing he's saying they left

Egypt 430 years since our forefather

Abraham came into Canaan but 215 years

only since Jacob were moved into Egypt

Flavius Josephus is saying the exact

same thing so why do modern translations

say that the Israelites were in Egypt

for 430 years when this is not

mathematically possible the reason why

is because modern translations like the

New King James the NIV the NASB these

are all translated from the

brooo Masoretic text but the Hebrew

Masoretic text is not the original

Hebrew text the copy of the Masoretic

text that most modern translations are

translated from is called the Leningrad

codex which was copied in the 11th

century AD but the Greek Septuagint was

translated more than a thousand years

before that in 250 BC which means that

the Greek Septuagint would not have been

translated from the Hebrew Masoretic but

rather it would have been translated

from a much older copy of the Hebrew

that's no longer around today the

Samaritan Pentateuch also predates the

Masoretic text and would also have been

translated from a much older copy of the

Hebrew Flavius Josephus was a 1st

century Jewish historian he lived long

before the Masoretic text was copied and

Josephus had access to ancient Hebrew

texts that has since been lost or

destroyed Paul the Apostle lived long

before the Masoretic text was copied and

Paul knew Hebrew in acts 26 when Paul

talks about his encounter with Jesus on

the road to Damascus he says that Jesus

spoke to him in the Hebrew language and

Paul understood him Paul knew Hebrew and

so Paul would also have studied from a

much older copy of the Hebrew and what

Paul says in Galatians 3:16 and 17 is

consistent with the Greek Septuagint the

Samaritan Pentateuch and the writings of

Flavius Josephus now the Bible says by

the mouth of two or three witnesses

every word shall be established we've

got more than two or three witnesses

here we've got four witnesses all

bearing witness that the original Hebrew

text said that the Israelites will be in

Egypt and Canaan for 430 years but more

than a thousand years later when the

Hebrew Masoretic text was copied the

phrase and Canaan was dropped out of the

text and all of our Bibles are

translated from this corrupted copy of

the Hebrew the New King James the old

King James the NIV the NASB the ESV if

you go to Bible gateway calm you'll find

there's 50 English translations of the

Bible on this website and every single

one of them say that the Israelites were

in Egypt for 430 years which is

incorrect and mathematically impossible

every single one of these translations

are inconsistent with the original

Hebrew because they're all translated

from the Hebrew Masoretic and according

to these four witnesses the Masoretic

text copied it incorrectly as a matter

of fact these ages of Moses and his

father and grandfather are recorded in

the mazzard

texts and yet they only add up to 350

years maximum so in that sense there's

even a fifth witness the Masoretic bears

witness against itself and so the amount

of time the Israelites were in Egypt was

only 215 years but the years of slavery

was even less than that because the

Israelites did not become slaves until

after Joseph and all that generation

died and then a new king arose who did

not know Joseph well Joseph was 30 years

old when he entered pharaoh's service

then shortly after there were seven

years of abundance and then seven years

of famine so it would appear that after

the seven years of abundance Joseph

would have been 37 years old then two

years into the famine when he was 39

that's when all of Israel arrived in

Egypt so based on the information given

it appears as if Joseph was 39 years old

at the beginning of that two hundred

fifteen years then Joseph died at 110 so

take 110 and subtract 39 and that equals

71 which means that for 71 years the

Israelites were in Egypt under Joseph's

rule and they were not slaves during

those 71 years so take the 215 years

that the Israelites were in Egypt

subtract the 71 years that Joseph was in

power and that 

equals 

144 which means

that the Israelites were not slaves for

any longer than 144 years maximum now

Moses was 80 years old when they left

Egypt and they were already in slavery

when Moses was born which means that

they could not have been slaves for any

less than 80 years minimum so take the

215 years that the ears realized were in

Egypt subtract the 71 years that Joseph

was in power subtract the eight years of

Moses his life in that equals 64 which

means that there were 64 years in

between Joseph's death and Moses birth

the Israelites became slaves sometime

after Joseph died and some time before

Moses was born sometime within that

sixty four year time period now let's

just assume that the Israelites became

slaves at exactly the midpoint in

between Joseph's death and Moses birth

that would be 32 years after Joseph died

in 32 years before Moses was born if

this is the case then that would mean

that the Israelites were slaves for 112

years and so the amount of time the

Israelites were in slavery was probably

about 112 years or so maybe a little bit

more maybe a little bit less but

definitely no more than a maximum of 144

and definitely no less than 80 years

minimum whatever the case the issue

were definitely not slaves for nearly as

long as the movies make it sound when

they say the Israelites were not slaves

for 400 years they were only slaves for

about one hundred and twelve years or so

plus or minus thirty-two years but

doesn't Genesis 15:13 say that they'll

be enslaved for hundred years no it

doesn't it says they'll be enslaved and

mistreated for hundred years

you see Genesis 15 does not say the

Israelites will be enslaved in Egypt for

hundred years it says Abraham's seed

will be enslaved and mistreated in a

land not their own for hundred years

Canaan was a land not their own Egypt

was a land not their own

Isaac was Abraham's seed Jacob was

Abraham's seed the multitudes in Egypt

or Abraham's seed Isaac was mistreated

in Canaan Genesis says that Ishmael the

son of Hagar was scoffing at Isaac Paul

says in Galatians that the son who was

born according to the flesh who was

Ishmael persecuted the son who was born

according to the spirit who was Isaac

Paul says that Ishmael persecuted Isaac

so Isaac Abraham's seed was persecuted

or mistreated in Canaan a land not his

own Abraham's seed was mistreated in a

land not his own from the time that

Abraham received the promise to the time

that Moses received the law there was

430 years according to Galatians 3:17 25

years after Abraham received the promise

that's when Isaac was born that takes it

down to four hundred and five years now

Genesis says that Ishmael scoffed at

Isaac on the same day that Isaac was

weaned well according to the Jewish

Agency for Israel in Talmudic times it

was the custom to celebrate the child

weaning anytime from 18 months to 5

years it goes on to say that according

to rabbi Joshua a child should be

allowed to nurse up to the age of five

well if Isaac was weaned at five years

of age and Ishmael began to persecute

Isaac on the same day that Isaac was

weaned then that would take it down to

exactly 400 years Abraham's seed was

mistreated in Canaan Abraham's seed was

mistreated in Egypt

Abraham C was enslaved in Egypt

Abraham's seed was enslaved and

mistreated in a land not their own for

hundred years you see when you take the

prophecy in Genesis

and you match that up with the timeline

and exodus then you're able to

understand how these puzzle pieces fit

together

but the main thing that causes people to

misinterpret this prophecy in Genesis is

the Hebrew Masoretic text has dropped

the phrase and Canaan out of the text

this is the main thing that causes

people to believe that the Israelites

were in Egypt for 430 years but the

truth is they were in Egypt for only

half that time for 215 years according

to the documentary patterns of evidence

the Exodus the Israelites arrival in

Egypt was around 1665 BC and the exodus

took place at about 1450 BC this means

that the Israelites were in Egypt for

215 years this is the only thing that

the archaeological evidence supports the

evidence does not support 430 years in

Egypt this is the reason why it's

important to understand biblical history

correctly first in order to correctly

understand how it correlates with

Egyptian history and archaeology


NEXT

The Exodus was not in the reign of Ramses, or any of the Ramses. It occurred the reign of Amenhotep II, the muscle guy. The date was 1480 from the Cross, or 1448 BC. We do have some evidence. There was a queen at that time who was the daughter of pharaoh Tutmose I, named Hatshepsut. She was reigning with her husband at the time Moses was born (1560 from the Cross). 1448 BC was the time of the eruption of Mt Thera, which caused the plagues on Egypt; only God caused them by creating Mt. Thera. Amenhotep II created a stele commemorating the Exodus, calling Moses the "prince of the desert".
Show less

NEXT

hi everyone I just got back from a long

trip to Egypt and I was going to the

sites that have to do with the biblical

event of The Exodus archeology is the

study of the ancient people from what

they've left behind and one thing that

the pharaohs have left behind is

themselves in their mummified remains

and so you go into the museum into the

Royal mummy room and here are the

Pharaohs of old I'm used to looking at

Pottery that dates to the time of a king

it's really intriguing when you're

looking at the Kings themselves

of these Royal mummies which one was the

Pharaoh of The Exodus and this is hotly

debated to this day but here's the thing

if you just follow what the Bible says

if you just follow the evidence then the

answer to this question is actually

straightforward and clear

don't forget to hit that subscription

button and I wanted to thank everybody

that's been leaving comments in the

video comment section about my book I

appreciate that very much and I will

leave a link in the description where

you can order a copy of my book where

God came down the archaeological

evidence okay so if we're going to talk

about the Pharaoh of The Exodus then we

need to talk about the historian monetto

because he's an extra biblical source

for The Exodus now the writings of

monetto are lost to us except through

the quotes from later writers and the

earliest of those writers is the first

century Jewish historian Josephus this

is the complete works of Josephus and in

it Josephus wrote that one of Egypt's

principal writers was monetto who was by

birth an Egyptian he wrote a history of

his own country in the Greek tongue out

of their sacred records

Josephus says of mineto I will set down

his very words as if I were to bring the

very man himself into a court for a

witness okay so what Josephus is saying

here is that the 81st Century historian

Josephus is directly quoting the earlier

3rd Century BC historian monetto who has

written a history of Egypt using these

much earlier Egyptian records

there's no doubt that monetto wrote

about the Israelites because he

described a people whose leader was

called Moses who were captives in Egypt

but when they went out of that country

they built a city in Judea and called it

Jerusalem then menetho says that these

people took their Journey from Egypt

during the reign of a minifist the king

of Egypt

a minifist is the Greek form of the

Egyptian name amenhotep so in Josephus

we are given a quote from monetto where

he names the Pharaoh of The Exodus this

is huge Josephus doesn't know the name

amenhotep he only knows it because he's

quoting moneto and minetho knows the

name amenhotep because he has access to

these early Egyptian records so the name

amenhotep the Pharaoh of The Exodus is

coming from these earlier records

and being recorded in the history of

Egypt written by mineto in the 3rd

Century BC and then quoted in A.D first

century by the historian Josephus

this is an incredible source that lets

us know the name of the Exodus Pharaoh

in Egypt I met up with one of my good

friends and colleagues archaeologist Dr

Titus Kennedy and one of the sites that

we traveled to was the ancient site of

heliopolis this is where Minato served

as a priest and where he wrote his

history of Egypt we're here at

heliopolis the city of the sun now this

city is important for many reasons but

one of those is that there was a priest

here who lived in the fourth and 3rd

Century BC named manetho who was one of

the foremost historians for ancient

Egypt and in his writings manetho tells

us that the Pharaoh of The Exodus was

someone named amen hotep the Pharaohs

that are named amen hotep are found in

the 18th Dynasty and so in the 18th

Dynasty you have amen hotep the first

second third Etc and so which one of

these is the one that manetho is

referring to and the best way to figure

this out is to use use the biblical date

of The Exodus which is found in First

Kings 6 1. first king 6 1 says in the

480th year after the Israelites came out

of Egypt in the fourth year of Solomon's

Reign Over Israel in the month of ziv

the second month he began to build the

Temple of the Lord so there's 480 years

between these two events when the

Israelites came out of Egypt The Exodus

and the fourth year of Solomon's Reign

it's very well established that the

fourth year of Solomon's Reign is 966 BC

so to get the date of The Exodus all we

have to do is add 480 years to 966 BC

and we get 1446 BC which is the biblical

date of The Exodus now we can turn our

attention back to the Egyptian

chronology and we can ask the simple

question is there a pharaoh named

amenhotep that is reigning during the

biblical date 1446 BC amenhotep the

first ran from 1540

6-1526 his Reign is too early amenhotep

the third Reign too late from 1414 to

1377 BC in between them almond hotep the

second Reign from 1450 to 1423 and so

the biblical date of 1446 BC for The

Exodus Falls within the reign of

amenhotep II the Almond hotep that

monetto was writing about must be

amenhotep II because the dates of his

Reign are in sync with the biblical date

of The Exodus there's additional

information from other verses in the

Bible that can also be used to further

test amenhotep II for example in Exodus

it talks about the Pharaoh that Reigns

before The Exodus pharaoh and he is

often referred to as the Pharaoh of the

oppression in the book of Exodus we are

told this Pharaoh tried to kill Moses

but Moses fled from pharaoh and went to

live in Midian during that long period

period the king of Egypt died before the

Lord had said to Moses and Midian go

back to Egypt in the New Testament in

Acts chapter 7 Stephen is retelling how

Moses fled to Midian but then after 40

years had passed he returned to Egypt we

contest this then with amenhotep II did

the predecessor of amenhotep II Reign

for more than 40 years well his

predecessor was his father thutmos III

and thutmos III had a reign of 54 years

he's the only Pharaoh in the 18th

Dynasty that had a Reign for more than

40 years so amenhotep II passes this

test Exodus 11 5 says of the tenth

plague that every firstborn son in Egypt

will die including the firstborn son of

pharaoh who sits on the throne if

amenhotep II is The Exodus Pharaoh then

his firstborn son should have died in

the 10th plague and so the successor of

amenhotep II is his son thutmos IV who

is not his firstborn son his firstborn

son died mysteriously we know from the

Egyptian records

this is the Great Sphinx at Giza between

the paws of the Sphinx is What's called

the Sphinx dream Steely this was

commissioned by Pharaoh futmos IV who

told a story about he came down to the

Sphinx he took a nap and while he was

sleeping the gods came to him in a dream

and they promised to him that he would

become the next Pharaoh this was strange

because he had an older brother who was

the Crown Prince but this older brother

had mysteriously died and disappeared

from history this was propaganda he used

the gods to give him Divine legitimacy

when he wasn't expected to become the

next Pharaoh so we have uh amenhotep II

passing these tests these biblical

criteria because his predecessor reigned

for over 40 years and the one who

succeeded him to the throne was not his

firstborn son next we traveled deep into

the region of the Delta to the ancient

site of avarus one of the main

excavators of of varus is the Austrian

archaeologist Manfred B talk and he's

the one that excavated the 18th Dynasty

Palace there so we are here at avarice

and this is where the Palace of

amenhotep II was discovered and

excavated yeah starts in that corner

essentially

yeah and then comes over like this so

we're just out in an agricultural field

right here this is all that's left we

can see Pottery around we can see a few

Foundation Stones around but this is

where the 18th Dynasty Palace stood and

this field underneath our feet and

behind me here but this is this is a

palace that has been discovered and this

is a palace that has been excavated how

long have they been Excavating in this

area about 60 years and yet there's like

nothing hardly to see here it's just all

been turned back into agricultural

Fields yeah mostly pottery and Maps

btalk reported that the archeology

demonstrated that the occupation of this

Palace covers the time from Amos to

amenhotep II this Palace complex was

occupied Through The Rains of futmos III

and amenhotep II when it was suddenly

and mysteriously abandoned so the

excavations at the 18th Dynasty Palace

in Everest provide provided then

archaeological evidence to support

amenhotep II as The Exodus pharaoh

[Music]

one of the most impressive pharaohs in

all of Egyptian history is the Pharaoh

Ramses II and so it was very early on

that egyptologists started to propose

that Ramses II must have some connection

with the Exodus

I am here at Memphis this is the first

capital of Egypt and below me is this

colossal statue of Ramses II who built

this site up during his reign

[Music]

thank you

[Music]

now the biggest problem with Ramses the

second being The Exodus Pharaoh is time

because uh Ramses II did not start his

Reign until 1279 BC so this is 167 years

later than 1446 BC which is the biblical

date for The Exodus and remember that

the predecessor to The Exodus Pharaoh

has to have a reign of more than 40

years the predecessor of Ramses II is

seti the first and he reigned from 1290

to 1279 BC which is just a reign of 11

years so he fails the test now Ramses II

does have a very long reign of 66 years

and so is he the Pharaoh of the

oppression well the problem here is that

would make his successor mernepta the

Pharaoh of The Exodus and The Exodus

Pharaoh can't have their first born son

inherit their Throne because he would

have died in the tenth plague the

successor to mernepta is study the

second and he is his firstborn son so

the reason that Ramses II can't be

connected to the Exodus is because he

fails all these tests if he failed just

one of these criteria then he would be

disqualified as a candidate but he fails

on all counts so now I'm going to give

my general views of the debate that's

been going on for a long time between

the early date and the late date the

early date for The Exodus is in the 15th

century BC the late date is in the 13th

century BC and this is amenhotep II

versus Ramses II as pharaoh of The

Exodus the main verse that's used for

the late date is Exodus 111 and here we

have the Israelites under slave masters

who build a store city named Ramses and

so the idea is that this city named

Ramses is connected to the Pharaoh

Ramses II and therefore The Exodus must

date to his time avarice was established

in the 12th Dynasty but in the 19th

Dynasty to the north a new city and

Palace emerged called P Ramses

now in the book of Exodus we see that

one of the store cities that's built is

called Ramses

some have explained this as scribal

updating later on but there's a

possibility that this area was also

called Ramses during the 18th Dynasty

now it's important to understand that

Exodus 111 is not in conflict with the

early date so even if the name Ramsey

says a late name for the city it's still

not a problem for the early date because

sometimes the Bible uses later names for

cities in place of earlier ones a good

example of this is the city of Dan in

judges 18 we have the danites capture

and rebuild a city and then they name it

Dan after their ancestor though it had

formally been called leish then we can

go back in time all the way back to

Genesis 14 14 which tells us that Abram

went as far as Dan so here we have a

clear example of the later name for the

city Dan replacing the earlier name

leish and this is done because the

Israelites were more familiar with the

name Dan and so this this is what may be

going on in Exodus 111 where we have

possibly the later name for the city

Ramses being used instead of the earlier

name just as we wouldn't date Abram

using the name of the city Dan in

Genesis 14 14 so we shouldn't date The

Exodus by the name of the city Ramses in

Exodus 111. the main verse as we've

already covered for the early date is

First Kings 6 1. this is a real problem

for the late date and so the way that

they argue against First Kings 6 1 is

they say that the 480 years that's

mentioned there shouldn't be taken

literally it's not a literal number

uh what this is really talking about

they argue is 12 generations of 40 years

but then they say 40 years is too long

for a generation it really should be 25

years well 12 times 25 is 300 years so

if you reduce

480 years in first king 6 1 down to 300

years then you've moved the whole

chronology

180 years later in time and then it fits

the reign of Ramses II before the late

date Theory came along nobody read first

king 6 1 and read 480 years and said oh

I get it that really means 300 years

this is a reinterpretation of this verse

and it's agenda driven so what's the

agenda the agenda is to make Ramses the

second the Pharaoh of The Exodus now

there's another problem with the late

date with judges 11 26. so in judges 11

26 we have jephthah who says for a 3 300

years Israel has occupied the land east

of the Jordan this took place around

1100 BC when you had 300 years to 1100

BC you get 1400 BC add the 40 Years of

wilderness wandering and then you get

this mid-15th Century BC date for The

Exodus which is an agreement with the

mid 15th century date of The Exodus from

First Kings 6 1. so since judges 11 26

also gives the 15th century BC date for

The Exodus then the late date Scholars

have to present their arguments against

it so what they say is that jephthah is

unreliable and the reason that they give

is that he calls in verse 24 the name of

the ammonite God kamosh whereas later in

the Bible for example in First Kings 11

5 the name of the ammonite God is given

as molik so jephthah can't be trusted he

gives the wrong name of the god of the

ammonites and so therefore in verse 26

when he says this 300 years you can't

trust that 300 years as being accurate

well

this is this is actually from Jeff the a

very important information about the

ammonites he's telling us that earlier

in their history they worshiped the god

kamosh which makes sense because that's

the god that the moabites worship and

the ammonites and the moabites are

brother Nations uh that come from lot

and so um they worshiped early in their

history commotion then later they

changed and adopted for whatever reason

the worship of the Amorite god molik

well

historically Nations sometimes change

their gods few examples of this is

Babylon Babylon changed their God

Nebuchadnezzar worshiped Marduk and then

nabanitis led the people to worship the

God's sin Egypt changed his God during

The Reign of Akhenaten and the Israelite

prophets are almost constantly rebuking

the Israelites for changing their God

right because they forsaken their God

who delivered them out of Egypt and are

worshiping these other gods so this is

not any kind of proof that that jephthah

is being unreliable when he gives us the

number 300 and again these two verses

first king 6 1 and judges 11 26

complement each other they confirm each

other it's very powerful evidence and

this is the same argument that these

Scholars use against Acts chapter 7 and

the testimony of Stephen he's unreliable

he's untrustworthy they need to say this

because even gives information

that contradicts Ramses II as being the

Pharaoh of The Exodus because he says

that Moses returns to Egypt after 40

years had passed which means that the

predecessor as we've looked at already

of The Exodus Pharaoh needs to have

rained for more than 40 years and the

predecessor for Ramses the second only

reigned for 11 years so they say the

same thing well Stephen's testimony is

unreliable it can't be trusted and

that's just simply not the case so

Minato is a big problem for the late

date because he doesn't name Ramses as

the Pharaoh of The Exodus he names

amenhotep

uh so guess what the late date Scholars

say about monetto you guessed it he's

unreliable uh and so the argument that

they use against him is that uh there's

these variants now of course uh for many

ancient sources and ancient texts

there's later variants

um that's why we have textual criticism

which is identifying those variants and

trying to get as close as possible to

the original the general understanding

for ancient Texas the earlier texts are

usually considered more reliable than

the later ones and so of all the

historians that quote monetto by far the

earliest is Josephus and everything that

we've covered comes directly out of

Josephus the other problem with monetto

being unreliable is that to this day the

framework for uh for the history laying

out the history of ancient Egypt with

these 30 dynasties that ruled over Egypt

that all comes from monetto and so it

really doesn't work just to write

monetto off as being unreliable and in

addition to all of this we have the

archeology from a virus which shows that

the 18th Dynasty Palace came to an end

during the reign of amenhotep II the

Palace of the 19th Dynasty and P Ramses

didn't start with Ramses II nor did it

end after his Reign really the reality

is is that the evidence for the date and

the Pharaoh of The Exodus is stacked on

the early date side

this is the mummy of amenhotep II and

the evidence is clear that he was the

Pharaoh of The Exodus what is the

archaeological evidence for the Exodus

well here's something uh The Mummy of

amenhotep II according to the evidence

when you're looking at the mummy of

almond hotep II you're looking at the

very man who dealt with Moses who

hardened his heart and wouldn't let

God's people go who went through the ten

plagues this is the Pharaoh whom God

delivered his people from so don't

forget to hit that subscribe button I'll

leave a link in the description where

you can order a copy of my book you can

watch other videos that we produced here

and thanks for watching I'll catch you

next time

NEXT

the text says that the 12 sons of Jacob

who became the 12 tribes of Israel had

grown to a tremendous population of

about 600 000 men

If This Were true when you add in women

and children it would likely mean a

total population of over 2 million

many find it hard to imagine this many

people crossing the wilderness

this is why most in the Egyptian group

favor much smaller numbers for the

Israelites

it has to do with the Hebrew word aleph

Dr Bryant wood is the former director of

ABR and he favors the Egyptian approach

this matter of numbers large numbers in

the Old Testament is a very very thorny

issue but I think clearly

it has to do with our understanding of

the Hebrew word elif which is translated

one thousand so if it says 650 eloffs

then that would mean 650

000. if you take lftamine 1000 right I

believe that in these early uh accounts

that it must have another meaning we

find in fact that there are some places

in the Old Testament where it's

translated Chief it's translated Clan I

I like the translation unit okay better

one scholar who looked at this recently

is Colin Humphries in England

and he concluded that it was about

twenty thousand people total that left

Egypt and I think that's a reasonable

figure and of course if you use the

translation of 1000 for L if you come up

with 600 000 men which would mean you

know several million Israelites leaving

Egypt and I think that's an impossibly

large number most Scholars I've

interviewed in my investigation favor

much smaller numbers for the Israelites

and I have to admit this is part of the

story that I've struggled with the most

how could so many have survived in the

wilderness

what people are wanting to do is narrow

this language of elif in the census list

which are only about the military men 20

and over narrow that to mean a military

company a military grouping but if we do

that we end up with very very small

Israelite population what's clear in the

biblical text is that there has to be

enough Israelites in order to make

pharaoh and the rest of Egypt scared

Exodus chapter 1 that they were

multiplying in such great ways thus

being faithful to God's promise and

bringing fear to the Egyptian Army if

the Israelite population had grown like

it's written then it would have been a

fantastic miracle and it would have been

just what God had promised Abraham that

his descendants would become as numerous

as the stars in the sky on their way to

inheriting the promised land

this is in line with the Hebrew approach

there are several places where Moses

uses the Hebrew word aleph that indicate

it was operating with the normal meaning

of one thousand

for instance in the book of Exodus Moses

tells about an offering taken at Mount

Sinai

and from 20 years old and upward was to

contribute a half-sheko according to the

sanctuary shekel

the rich could not give more and the

poor could not give less and the number

of half shekels collected came to 603

550.

then there was the census taken at Mount

Sinai

God told Moses take a census of all the

congregation of the people of Israel by

Clan by father's houses according to the

number of names every male head by head

each tribe listed their numbers and the

total of the 12 tribes were 603 550.

when the numbers for each tribe in the

census are translated with aleph meaning

thousand they add up as expected

how then do those in the Egyptian

approach come up with smaller numbers

for this census you you always have a

thousand figure followed by a number the

word for a thousand has more than one

meaning in the Bible it has more than

one meaning if you take those groups

instead of saying 54 400 you would say

54 Clans or families totaling 400 people

62 Clans totaling 700 people and so

forth then instead of having 603 550 you

would have 598 groups

totaling 5550 people

I could see that if you add up the

census numbers using the meaning of clan

for aleph rather than thousand it does

not match what the Bible references

and totaling up the hundreds column does

not add up either

is the fact that these numbers are

adding up perfectly when translating

Alpha's thousand just a coincidence

you know a lot of people have a really

difficult time that there that there

were millions of people going out they

think well how could that many people

exist in the wilderness sure but in even

raising that question regarding their

existence in the wilderness it fails to

account for the text itself which says

Miracles were happening over and over

again miracles of Manna From Heaven

water from a rock

God didn't let their sandals wear out a

single pair of shoes for 40 years good

night

it's a miracle yet Dr beitzel stresses

the taking aleph to mean Clan rather

than thousand would not be changing the

wording of the Bible if you were to

divide up the word elephant that way and

you're not changing one vowel Point

you're not changing one letter in the

Hebrew Bible you're just taking eloff in

a non-numerical sense rather than in a

numerical sense I'm not saying that this

is an explanation that lies Beyond

questions but I am saying to you that in

my view

this is the

most cogent

alternative view it doesn't answer all

the questions right if it answered all

the questions we wouldn't be sitting

here even discussing it

again if we have a view that God is big

and that scripture is true it demands

that we understand he's able to sustain

Millions for 40 years

through wilderness

[Music]

so how does the traditional Sinai

measure up to these criteria

how are you going to prove it

how are we going to prove it well you're

not going to find parts of the Ten

Commandments on any of these mountains

I do know that in front of what is

traditionally Mount Sinai there's a

large plane called the plain of Raha

which we have wonderful drawings by

Roberts in the 1850s where you could

have thousands of people standing there

I know of no other place in Sinai

that

can replicate that that the two

conditions tall mountain and a plane in

front of it

in Midian

I don't know the answer

well I've heard suggestions that there

just isn't enough room for an encampment

at the traditional Mount Sinai

absolutely not true that this is a

massive planet called araha plane it's

huge Saint Catherine's Monastery is just

here this is a very very broad Sunday

plain where a massive Camp could be set

up a huge camp

[Music]

when the children of Israel left Egypt

there were six hundred thousand men of

military age plus their families

a mixed multitude also went up with them

and great numbers of livestock flocks

and herds

the Egyptian approach doesn't believe

the Bible is meaning six hundred

thousand men but rather 600 groups

so I need to visualize the Israelite

population along with the camping areas

available at all the proposed mountains

if each Israelite family of 10 is

assigned a 40 by 40 foot space then a

group of one thousand would occupy a

square about the size of three football

fields

the Egyptian approach typically

estimates the Israelite population at

between five and thirty thousand

the space available at the traditional

Mountain could easily have accommodated

this number however the Hebrew approach

believes that there were at least two to

three million Israelites

if that were the case they would not

have had the room to Camp there

Moses commanded the Israelites to wash

their clothes in preparation to meeting

God

NEXT

three of the world's major religions

trace back to one man

who the bible says was named abraham

however

skeptics allege there is not enough

evidence to suggest this man ever

existed

or even if he did exist the stories

about him in genesis

are probably later embellished legends

does the account of abraham

correlate to a real time in history or

is the account of him

just another later fabrication

[Music]

if you add up the dates in the bible

abraham would have existed

in the early bronze age sometimes also

referred to as the intermediate bronze

age

however craig olson notes there are

numerous difficulties

with placing abraham back this far

because several things

genesis records would contradict what

the archaeological record says about

this time period

however as we noted in our video on

genesis 5

abraham in the ages of his immediate

descendants

seem to be idealized formulas and

probably do not reflect their actual

ages

olson also notes there are a few

indications in genesis

that abraham did not actually live to be

175

like that he didn't think people past

the age of 100 could have children

which would contradict the idea that

tara fathered him at age 130.

even more damning for this theory is it

is based on the masoretic reading of

exodus 12 40

which says the people of israel lived in

egypt for 430 years

in the samaritan pentateuch and the

greek septuagint

it says the time that the people of

israel lived in egypt

and canaan was 430 years

paul also seems to confirm this in

galatians when he says that the law of

moses

came 430 years after the promise was

made to abraham

if the exodus happened between 1450 and

1400 bc

which we will cover in an upcoming video

this would actually place abraham

in the middle bronze age 430 is also

probably rounded up for symbolic

purposes

meaning abraham could have even lived in

the 18th century bc

and i don't think that would change much

now when we look at the evidence for

abraham in the middle bronze age

we find the account of genesis

correlates well with the customs

laws and archaeological sites from this

time period

strengthening the reliability of the

account

to begin with some skeptics assert that

the name of abraham

is likely a literary invention since it

means father of many however

the hebrew language didn't exist until

centuries later

and the names abram and abraham might

just be hebrized forms of earlier names

and plus the names could have helped

shape the later language

furthermore we have found evidence of

the personal name

abba rama from around the 20th century

had a city called dilbat

the name abu rahana has been found in

execration texts

at saqqara the same components that make

up the name abram

have also been found in mari ebla yugara

and cyprus

the name abraham probably is just a

hebrized form

of one of these earlier names and would

fit with the cultural world of the

middle bronze

age ghosta alstrom says

these occurrences show that the name

abram is authentic

and not completely uncommon among west

semites

also in maritex we have found the name

laban

in ishmael tara sereg and nehor

resemble place names in the region of

heron

and nehor and heron are also mentioned

in the mari tablets

so there are several examples of names

fitting with the time period of the

middle bronze age

now genesis 11 and 12 says abraham and

his family

moved out from the city of ur which was

in the land of sumer

and they moved north to haran before

abraham

made the trip to canaan this seems odd

because abraham was supposed to be a

nomad yet is connected to cities

but during the middle bronze age

pneumatic herders

had family connections to cities and

would travel hundreds of miles in all

directions

richard hess notes that the archives in

mari

reveal the herders and the citizens of

the town

were part of larger families these

herders

also traveled long distances from home

and maintained family ties

that stretched hundreds of miles and

crossed the city-state borders

of that early period not only is this

true of jacob

and his sons in genesis 37 but it also

describes something

of jacob's earlier life his connections

with his father isaac

in southern palestine and his

relationship to his uncle laban and

heron

hundreds of miles to the north this

separation of families

was common at mari

in genesis abraham leaves from ur and

then heron

and then lives as a nomad whereas lot

settles in sodom

jacob sends joseph out from his home

base to search for his brothers

who have wandered somewhere in the

vicinity of shechem

the lifestyle of living nomadically and

still being connected to cities

or settlements was common in the middle

bronze age

as attested in the maritex daniel

fleming

reviewed several of these documents from

mari and says

as a whole the genesis picture of

ancestral pastoralism

is remarkably plausible in light of the

mari evidence

another interesting aspect is abraham at

one point

wanders down to egypt during the

intermediate bronze age

egypt was experiencing something known

as the first intermediate period

and the evidence suggests the egyptians

tried to keep travelers from kanan out

however things changed completely during

the later middle kingdom of egypt

a tomb from around 1870 bc shows 37

asiatics

visiting egypt in a work known as the

tale of sanuha

sanua fled to canaan when amenhop the

first died

around 1944 bc where he met a tribal

pastoralist

who had been in egypt trade routes

appear to have been open

during the middle bronze age paving away

for abraham

to make the journey we also have

evidence the pharaohs of the middle

kingdom

and the later new kingdom were attracted

to and sought out foreign women

which makes pharaoh's attraction to

sarah plausible

rationale for going to egypt to escape a

famine also seems plausible

phyllis saretta notes that centuries

earlier during the old kingdom of egypt

there is a depiction of asiatics coming

to egypt to escape a famine

it depicts groups of famine-stricken men

and women

emaciated and weak that they are the

desert bedouin seeking food in egypt

during a period of famine is probable

abraham would have likely followed the

same rationale given that there was a

famine in canaan

during his time however the famine of

abraham

is only mentioned as a brief incident

after he returns to canaan he and his

descendants

seem to prosper for several years before

another famine occurs

indicating the famine he experienced was

probably only a minor occurrence

finkelstein and langhot argue the middle

bronze age

was more humid than the previous period

but within this time period there were

also two points

indicating minor droughts one of which

could have been the drought that caused

a famine which would have pushed abraham

into egypt manfred b tech

also notes that during the middle

kingdom egyptian kings

had an east delta residence which would

make more sense in terms of abraham

coming in from the east and meeting with

the pharaoh

the pharaoh also used escorts to take

abraham

out of the country and this fits with

egyptian customs

in the tale of sunuh escorts are sent to

bring sanuha

back into the country the reverse of

escorting abraham

out of the country seems to fit with the

use of escorts for crossing the border

of egypt

so abraham's trip to egypt also seems

plausible

and fits with the cultural context of

the world of the middle bronze age

within kanan the existence of cities and

towns

mentioned in genesis also seems to fit

with this time period

finkelstein summarizes the situation

important biblical sites

that are mentioned in the abraham story

such as shechem beersheba

hebron did not yield fines from the

intermediate bronze age

these sites were simply not inhabited at

this time

however finkelstein also noticed the

existence of cities mentioned in genesis

are attested to in the middle bronze age

we have found evidence of leash and

shechem bethel

hebron and gerer appear to have been

occupied as well

kathleen kenyon states that the evidence

of occupation at jerusalem

only goes back to around 1800 bc

a plausible location for aya also dates

back to the middle bronze age

there is however no evidence of a

settlement at beersheba

during this time period but genesis only

refers to it as a group of wells

not a city or established settlement

thus the cities that genesis mentions

fit extremely well with the middle

bronze age

in genesis 14 it mentions a coalition of

kings

that attack the cities of the plain

which we refer to as sodom and gomorrah

prior to 2000 bc the whole region was

ruled by the third dynasty of ur

a coalition of kings from the area would

have been impossible

if the kings of her were still reigning

however

after this the ancient near east broke

up into smaller kingdoms

and evidence shows that during the

middle bronze age coalitions between

various kings were formed

more interestingly in genesis 14 it

mentions the king of alam was involved

there was only one time when alam

engaged in the politics of mesopotamia

which was during the middle bronze age

it is recorded they sent envoys

as far west as katna the existence of a

coalition of kings

is quite plausible within this time

period as the various kings

fought for total control of the area

before hammurabi

finally succeeded

abraham's nighttime raid is also

plausible in this time period

raids appear to have been a common

practice of warfare

similar to what we see in genesis one

text from mari

records that 300 yamanites have gone

away the encampment

on the bank of the euphrates

also the narrative of genesis 14 fits

with the narrative structure of a text

called yakadam lim which dates to around

the same time period

both begin with the first raid or war

and one side being made a vassal

followed by a revolt and then the vassal

being subdued again

genesis then includes abraham's victory

then it's followed by religious

ceremonies and ties

so the account of genesis 14 fits

extremely well with the middle bronze

age

just before the reign of hammurabi

genesis 15 continues the account and

records a covenantal ceremony

between abraham and god it has

correlations to this same time period

instead of it matching the structure of

later texts like what we see in jeremiah

34.

richard hess notes a similar custom was

found at the bronze age city

of alilac the texts found there were

written in the old babylonian script

one of these tablets describes the

swearing of an oath and involves a

ritual

not unlike that of genesis 15. wise

men's publication of this text

at456 led to the view that it preserves

evidence

for a covenant making ceremony in the

early second millennium bc

west semitic culture of alilac

genesis also records that the patriarchs

made four treaties during their lives

and they have striking similarities to

treaties from the same time period

that have been found at the sites of

mari and tel leyland

and not so much to treaties found in

later time periods

the treaties begin with declaring the

gods as witnesses followed by the

swearing of an oath

stipulations a ceremonial act and then

curses

victor matthews also notes the

difficulties faced by abraham

and isaac in dealing with abimelech of

gerer provide one of the best

comparisons

to the administrative texts from mari

negotiation of water rights

and the problems associated with the

transient populations are quite clear

in terms of customs the account of

abraham also fits with the middle bronze

age

and not entirely with later israelite

customs

found in the mosaic law most notably

is the practice of a ceremony of an air

by proxy

sarah rachel and leah provide their

handmaidens

for their husbands in order to have

offspring

parallels can be found in other texts

from the city of nuzi from about the

same time period

they record instances of a wife who was

unable to provide a child

so she would offer a slave or a servant

to create an heir for her and her

husband

now some skeptics like finkelstein

thomas thompson

and vance cedars have argued this

practice

is also found in later times during the

iron age

and doesn't necessarily correlate to the

middle bronze age

however kenneth kitchen and richard hess

note that the skeptics have glossed over

notable differences

in the examples they pull from later

time periods

and they don't parallel to the biblical

account like the texts from newsie do

from the middle and late bronze age

hess says the 12th century bce egyptian

text that vance cedars finds

as a parallel is a list of unusual

adoptions

not normal ones the 7th century bce

assyrian marriage document

says nothing about inheritance the

female slave

may be sold off at will for thompson

the newsie parallel does not mention

barrenness

and is a legal contract contragenesis

however the parallel is a husband having

a child by another woman

when his wife is unable to bear children

further late bronze age alike text

number 93

exemplifies a condition where barrenness

establishes a legal requirement to

conceive by another woman

behind such laws lies the importance

attached

to families and to inheritance rights

so this custom as recorded in genesis

best fits with the bronze age

and not the later iron age

earlier in genesis abraham says his heir

was eliezar of damascus

since he still had no children of his

own

parallel texts from this time period can

be found at babylon and mari

and speak of adopted heirs in genesis 23

abraham negotiates the purchase of a

cave to bury sarah

from a hittite who owned the land

abraham said he only wanted the cave

which would have been economically

pragmatic since in hittite law

owning all the land would incur tax but

not if he just owned the cave

test notes at ugarit nuzi and alilac

the special inheritance of the firstborn

could be legally transferred

which is seen in the genesis narratives

with abraham and eliezer

jacob and esau joseph over ruben and a

friend instead of manasseh

had newsy a custom is spoken of where an

heir is adopted

and marries the daughter of the adopter

this seems to correlate with the account

of jacob where laban

accepts him as his own and allows him to

marry his daughters

also at nuzi he is a custom of a woman

being adopted

with the condition she be married by the

adopter's son

interestingly enough both abraham and

isaac tend to call their wives

their sisters we also see that household

idols

were seen as proof of ownership of one's

inheritance

this might explain why that when jacob

fled laban

his wife rachel took the idols to secure

the inheritance of laban's land

as this would assure it passed to her

husband and her family

and newsy the same phrase we find in

genesis of their father consuming our

money

refers to withholding a dowry and would

explain why she took the idols

finally richard hess and other scholars

note there are distinct features of

genesis

that do not match later israelite

practices and themes

thus indicating the accounts of genesis

contain features

that would not support the later

israelite goals or customs

first genesis 12-50 reports nothing

on the destruction of pagan idols or

altars which was a very important issue

later during the periods of monarchy

there is also no contest

between yahweh and the pagan gods like

we see later

their role in the promised land is not

to purify it of any of those

already occupying it the genesis

narratives

would not have helped the biblical

authors in their quest to end pagan

worship

abraham was also a foreigner in the land

which would not support their claim that

they had a right to roll canaan

we also see no mention of the god baal

or later gods

that threaten the mnola tree of yahweh

this fits more with an earlier time

period

before baal was exalted to the position

of most high

in canaanite religions it also would not

help later israelite authors

who were trying to end baal worship in

israel

also we see things in genesis that would

have been counterproductive

for the later israelites abraham and his

descendants

worship in a manner that includes

mention of trees and pillars

where abraham placed altars but not of

prescribed places of worship

or of sabbath or food laws

so basically abraham does not promote

dietary laws

and worships in a way that was not

allowed in later times

with an israelite culture their moral

behavior

also doesn't really help promote mosaic

laws in fact

there is also a lack of ritual purity

and holiness

in the patriarchal narratives jacob

marries two sisters

judah and simeon marry canaanites and

joseph

marries an egyptian all of which was

condemned in mosaic law

both isaac and jacob give a larger

inheritance to a younger son

something also frowned upon in the

mosaic law

joseph had a cup which he used for

divination

which was directly outlawed later in

deuteronomy

walter moberly says if patriarchal

religion

corresponds to some kind of historical

reality then presumably

this is either some form of a genuinely

ancient

pre-yawistic religion or something that

was an unorthodox strand within

yahwehistic religion

prior to josiah's reforms the difficulty

with the latter suggestion

is precisely the complete lack of that

holiness and exclusiveness

which is one of the most fundamental

characteristics of yahwehism

so the account of abraham fits with a

pre-mosaic time period

before more revelation was revealed to

israel and a new covenant was formulated

now here's the main point individually

none of these points would amount to

much

however combined they form a strong case

the genesis narrative of abraham

and his descendants are historically

accurate accounts

if you are a jew living in the iron age

or in babylon

you might get one or two things correct

about the middle bronze age

but you're unlikely to get all of these

data points correct

and then weave them into a coherent

narrative especially when archives

like what we find in mari were buried

and lost until the modern era

a jew in babylon would not have had

access to these documents

to construct a legendary narrative of

abraham

the amount of correct information and

parallels we find in the middle bronze

age

strongly indicates that the later

authors of genesis

were not constructing a legend but

reporting what was accurately handed

down to them

now some argue there are anachronisms in

the text which we will deal with in

other videos

specifically with regards to camels and

the philistines

however some argue there are additional

anachronisms with regards to place names

that would indicate genesis dates to a

later time period

for example genesis records that abraham

left er of the chaldeans but the

chaldeans were a later group

that did not control the area until the

iron age

but updating language and place names

was also a standard practice

in the ancient world for example there

is an

updated version of the tale of sanui

that dates to the 13th century bc in

cairo

within it the word for c is updated to

yam

a semitic loanword that was not used in

the middle kingdom

the older location of kadem is replaced

with kadesh

likewise the place names and titles in

the text of genesis

would be expected to be updated over

time

without compromising the narratives as a

whole

just like today we can say the dutch

found in new york

even though they called it new amsterdam

thus given the archaeological data we

have good evidence to trust the

narratives of abraham

as real historical accounts and not

later legends

developed for israel however

during the life of abraham something

cataclysmic happened

within canaan the destruction of several

cities occurred

was this historical were sodom and

gomorrah

really destroyed by fire we will

investigate this

in another video

[Music]


NEXT

the bible records at jacob led his

family to egypt

where his descendants remain for about

200 years

but even more interesting is that

genesis says

one of his sons became a high-ranking

egyptian official

which many would have been one of the

most powerful men in all of egypt

is there any evidence for this account

or was it just a legend

that was added to the bible

one of the problems with looking for

evidence of joseph and jacob

is they would have lived during the

second intermediate period of egypt

a time that we know very little about

if the life of abraham in the

destruction of sodom and gomorrah

took place during the middle prawns age

2. that would mean joseph and jacob

would have most likely lived between

1700

and 1600 bc but this time period in

egypt

is highly debated after the end of the

middle kingdom

egypt divided into smaller dynasties

we know very little about them in

egyptologists debate over where certain

pharaohs belong

or how long each would have reigned for

example

some egyptologists believe deedu moses

ii

was a pharaoh of the 16th dynasty

others believe he was a pharaoh of the

13th dynasty

some think his reign ended around 1690

bc

others think it ended around 1580 bc

in addition to that we know very little

about him or what he did

and this is not an isolated case our

information on the second intermediate

period

is fragmented and very much is still

debated among egyptologists

so if this is the time period of jacob

and joseph

we are very limited in what we are able

to find out about them

and the hebrews however

since that is the case it would be

premature

for someone to say the account of joseph

and jacob could not have a historical

basis in egypt

because the time period when they lived

is so heavily fragmented

it is currently impossible to fully

piece together

or know with certainty what was going on

despite that there are some correlations

with genesis we are able to identify

what we do know is that at some point

during the second intermediate period

canaanites that lived in egypt during

the middle kingdom and later referred to

as the hixos

established the 15th dynasty of egypt

and ruled over most of egypt until they

were defeated

by the 17th dynasty thereby establishing

the 18th dynasty of egypt

and the period known as the new kingdom

the hixos seemed to have come to power

around the same time israel

would have migrated to egypt and they

were the most likely dynasty

that joseph would have served under

a good reason that supports this

connection is the evidence suggests

chariots

were invented outside of egypt by

asiatics

in the middle kingdom there is little

evidence that suggests chariots

were used to high degrees by the native

egyptians

and the foreign hicks host rulers likely

would have been able to use their

mastery of horse-drawn chariots

to dominate egypt until the native

egyptians

learned how to master this technology

some egyptologists suggest it was the

hixos that introduced chariots to egypt

but that is debated as there is some

early evidence that suggests egypt

had some knowledge of chariots but we

don't really see them become prominent

until the hixo's period specifically

manfred b tech argues the light

horse-drawn chariot

was an asiatic invention that was

introduced during the hicksos period

and this is when chariots really became

prominently used in warfare and as a

mode of transportation

and genesis records multiple uses of

chariots

during the time period of joseph

suggesting a time frame

when chariots were more prominent in

egypt

joanne fletcher also notes the hixos

maintain their own funerary customs

involving burying their dead close to

home

which correlates to joseph burying his

father and canaan

and wanting his remains taken when

israel left egypt

although there is evidence asiatics

could rise to powerful positions in

egypt

during times apart from hixo's rule

joseph's appointment

seems to be sudden and an extremely high

promotion

the native egyptians seem to have

disliked and looked down upon foreigners

at large

and don't seem to have liked living

under hixo's rule

if the pharaoh of genesis was a hixos

this might explain why he was quick to

promote joseph to the position

due to cultural connections and perhaps

he felt he could trust someone from

kanan more

than some of the native egyptians he was

rolling over

so based on these factors the story of

joseph can correlate to a time period

of serving under a hixo's pharaoh

during the second intermediate period

especially in the 1600s

the 15th dynasty dominated egypt

the native egyptians ruled in the south

at thebes

but there is evidence they had to pay

tribute to the hixos until they were

able to challenge them

in open warfare so during the 1600s

it would appear as though the hixos were

rolling over egypt through tribute

for a short period of time after this

the native egyptians defeated the hixos

and regained control of egypt

then they attempted to wipe out the

inscriptions and monuments of the hixos

which contributes to why we don't know a

lot about this time period

what we also see is there is evidence of

famine in the region

around the same time period kim roy says

just as egypt had been severely affected

by famines

during the late 13th 14th dynasties so

southern egypt

continued to suffer from famines in the

late second intermediate period

on a steely of his nepher hotep iii

explicitly praises himself as he who

nourishes his city

saving it from famine senwothret iv

who seems to have ruled during the late

16th dynasty

adopted a similar statement for his

nebuti name he who nourishes the two

lands

that the king's ability to provide for

his people had become a topic of such

importance

that it was proclaimed through the royal

titulary provides a strong indication

that recurrent famines besides the

aggressive canaanite dynasty in the

north

were the main political concerns of the

day

despite this the northern hixos dynasty

seems to have prospered and been the

dominant power force during this time

period

this would make sense if there was a

joseph figure in the north properly

managing the kingdom

to store up grain for a famine but once

again

we cannot know with certainty due to

limited data from this time period

at best what we can say is is that the

account of genesis

does seem to correlate with the hixos

pharaohs ruling over egypt

some object to the argument that joseph

was serving under hixo's pharaoh

and claimed genesis says joseph would

likely have served a native egyptian

pharaoh

so joseph really should be placed back

in the middle kingdom

the evidence they draw upon are that

joseph shaved before meeting the pharaoh

which would make him appear more

egyptian in genesis 43

the egyptians refused to eat with

joseph's brothers

because hebrews were considered

detestable suggesting the egyptians

under joseph

were not foreigners themselves and that

joseph's brothers

spoke their own language in front of the

egyptians thinking they would not

understand

whereas people originally from canaan

may have been able to understand the

language of the hebrews

these are easily met by looking at the

cultural context of the hixos

because the fragmented evidence suggests

they adopted many egyptian customs

dress and language joanne fletcher

notes they adopted egyptian titles

hieroglyphic script

and many customs in general so they

would have acted and appeared egyptian

instead of acting like native canaanites

and may have even considered themselves

now to be egyptians second donald

redford

notes the native egyptian population

would have remained under the hixo's

authority

and would have most likely served their

new rulers so like they would have been

exiled or eliminated

so it's likely joseph would have had

native egyptians working for him

third genesis 42 only implies joseph's

brothers

thought joseph would not be able to

understand their language

it's also a conjecture to suggest the

hixos

and the hebrew spoke the exact same

language at that time

so these objections do not really

suggest the pharaoh joseph served under

necessarily had to be a native egyptian

considering it appears the hixos adopted

egyptian dress

and many customs they likely would have

considered themselves

to have become egyptian even if the

native egyptians did not agree

beyond this we can find several other

correlations in genesis

to this time period first the names of

this account

seem to fit with the general time frame

richard hess says

a form known as why prefix names fits

best the early second millennium bce

when this form occurs most frequently

why prefix names

occur less frequently in the late second

millennium and only occasionally

in the first millennium bce world of

west semitic personal names

further the name jacob appears on

scarabs

attributed to at least one hexose king

in egypt

hess also replies to an earlier scholar

thomas thompson

and notes the name benjamin does appear

as a proper name in the mari tex

from around the same time period

in one of the brooklyn papyra that dates

to the end of the middle kingdom

we see a list of several household

slaves

several semitic names that are very

similar to biblical names are recorded

there may be a feminine form of the name

menehem asher

is a car in jacob the name shifra

appears

the name of one of the hebrew midwives

from exodus 1 15

and the word hebrew may also be used as

a proper name

this list of semites being used as

domestic slaves

would correlate with the joseph story

who was sold to potiphar

to work in his household this seemed to

be a common use for slaves

during the middle kingdom and second

intermediate period

with regards to the egyptian names in

genesis kenneth kitchen has written

extensively on this

and demonstrates the egyptian names like

potiphar

also correlate with this time period

potiphar and potiphar

are likely hebrized forms of earlier

egyptian names

joseph's wife likely means she belongs

to you

and names with an af or a.s prefix are

attested to during the middle kingdom

genesis also notes joseph was given an

egyptian name

but what we read is likely a hebrized

translation

of an original egyptian name the first

part likely means

who is called in the latter half likely

means p

ankh so the name essentially means

joseph

who is called pyong this name correlates

well with the middle kingdom

as we have evidence that some egyptian

viziers had the name ankh

the ipa awk names are very common in the

middle kingdom

but not later so unlike the jed deity

names

we have good phonetics attested forms

and early dates

we also have the same usage for

foreigners in the middle kingdom

the papyrus brooklyn 35 1446

of circa 1730 has 48 asiatics

in its list of 77 household servants and

28 of these

show precisely the construction proposed

here

semitic name who is called egyptian name

so joseph's name correlates to the

naming structure in the brooklyn papyrus

as well as names from that time period

kitchen also notes the slave price that

joseph was sold for

of 20 shekels fits with the economics of

this time period

this we know to be approximately the

right price in about the 18th century

this is the average price expressed as

one-third of a mena

in the laws of hammurabi and in real

life transactions at mari

and in other old babylonian documents

within a 15 to 30 shekel range

averaging 22 shekels

later time periods have increased prices

for slaves

which shows us that the authors of

genesis either guessed accurately

the price of a slave from an earlier

time period or that the israelite people

retained an accurate oral tradition

handed down to them

other correlations can be found dream

interpretations

are a common theme throughout the

ancient world and seem to be attested

during the middle kingdom

the hebrew word for magician and dream

interpreter is most likely an egyptian

loanword

the use of a cup for divination also

seems to be an ancient near eastern and

egyptian theme

joseph is said to live to 110 which is

the ideal lifespan for an egyptian

kitchen notes joseph was given the sage

by later authors for symbolic purposes

to say that he was the perfect egyptian

when joseph is appointed to high office

he is given a golden chain

a ring and fine linens egyptologist

james hoffmeyer

notes similar scenes are depicted

throughout egyptian history

where the pharaoh promotes or rewards

someone and gives them fine linens and

gold jewelry

at times they are often displayed as

riding away in a chariot

which is similar to when genesis records

that the pharaoh

rode joseph around in his chariot

j robin king also notes the story of

joseph

uses the 10 narrative steps of the

egyptian work the tale of sanua

however he also notes the narrative

structure is not limited

to the egyptian tale and is found in

other cultures

but that these works are much more

historical and lack the rhetorical

polish

and romance of the egyptian story of

sanua

so the story of joseph seems to have

been intended to be historical

and not a legend or a mythological story

as james hoffmeyer said

if the 10 narrative steps of a hero tale

are typically used for historical

figures

then it is logical to assume that joseph

was an historical individual

so despite having limited data from the

second intermediate period

there are still a sufficient amount of

correlations we can find to the genesis

account

thus supporting the idea the joseph

story was intended to be historical

although we cannot find an explicit

mention of joseph in egypt

that alone doesn't indicate the story

was a fabrication

the account of israel and joseph in

egypt seems to correlate with the hixo's

period

however after the hicksos dynasty ended

they were replaced by the 18th dynasty

and the pharaoh who did not know joseph

rose to power one of the most important

biblical events would soon follow the

exodus

[Music]

[Music]

you

NEXT

hello and welcome to the second video

from the biblical timeline today we're

gonna do an overview of biblical

chronology from the time of Christ all

the way back to creation so this is

going to be a very high level video and

discussion there's already a video out

there on kings and chronicles and

eventually I plan to post more to cover

some of the other key questions in here

but this we're gonna keep it a fairly

high level so to begin we're talking

about biblical history particularly the

Old Testament the most well known work

on this is by a guy named James Ussher

who published in 1650 and he famously

put creation on a Sunday afternoon in

October in 4004 BC for which he has been

mocked for attempting to get to that

level of precision but that's out there

and you'll often hear that date quoted

by people as an example of oh this can't

be right but just want to put that out

there this was also an important topic

for other important folks in the church

back in that period of time Sir Isaac

Newton did a bunch of work that was

published after his death there are sort

of lots of others that have have worked

on this problem and and there really is

not a single solution and and we'll see

a bit of why that is little later on in

ancient times there were also a lot of

people who wrote on this topic most

famously probably was Josephus who had

the benefit of the temple Scrolls that

were rescued when the Romans conquered

Jerusalem in 70 AD he had access to

those and he wrote something called the

antiquities of the Jews as well as some

other works that dealt with Jewish

history

Eusebius would be another one he's most

well known for his history of the early

church up to his time but he also did a

chronicle of everything sort of the Old

Testament history up to that to his time

as well and then there are lots of

others a lot of whom we don't have the

original works anymore but we have

quotations in either Josephus or you

SEVIS or possibly

in other historians as our basis so the

important thing about these guys is that

all the ancient historians we're really

doing textual studies so there's telling

us well I've read this guy's work and he

says this happened in this year and you

know that's how they're building up

their history there's no benefit of

archaeology they're not going and

they're not reading the tomb walls in

Egypt or the inscriptions in Assyria

it's all from the scrolls that they have

access to on the plus side though they

had access to things that we don't have

anymore so most importantly probably

madatha or many though it was an

Egyptian historian all we have is

fragments of his work that are preserved

in Josephus new Sidious and a few others

so they definitely had sources that we

don't have and were able to benefit from

that and we really can't go back and

check their work if you will because we

just don't have those things anymore as

we get into this I'm gonna walk us

through most of what I'll call the seven

problems an Old Testament chronology

which are when was creation right when

was the world created according to the

Bible when was the flood when was Joseph

in Egypt if he wasn't Egypt you know

when was that and can we correlate that

to a particular fare or particular time

in Egypt when did the exodus occur occur

how long were the children of Israel in

Egypt after Joseph and Jacob and then

again what Pharaoh was ruling when they

left when did the judges rule this is

actually a fairly thorny problem even to

this day when did the Hebrew Kings live

and finally when was the 70 year

captivity I could probably add an eighth

which is when were the seventy weeks or

69 weeks of Daniel I'm not going to

cover that today that's sort of really

more of a New Testament topic and I'll

probably cover that at some time in the

future so if we're gonna get to this

what we need to do here is first

establish when the Kings lived and the

details of all the reigns of the Kings

are in kings and chronicles but we've

we've got to get to the a solid date

somewhere in that period that we can

start working backwards from because

there's nothing in the Old Testament

that tells us really you know how

far before the birth of Christ was any

of the kings or really anyone else so we

need to get ourselves to a starting date

once we have that we can figure out the

kings and chronicles we're gonna kind of

fly over the judges and when we get

there you'll see why but then we go to

when was the Exodus and the key verse

for that is first Kings 6:1 when was

Joseph in Egypt the key verse for that

as Exodus 12:40 when was the flood well

we can work back from the patriarchs to

the flood using Genesis 11 and then

finally we can work all the way back to

creation using Genesis 5 so this is the

path that we're going to go down but

you'll see that it's not exactly cut and

dried there's a lot of things going on

here for one if you consult a number of

different sources you know pick that

text book maybe look on Wikipedia or

something else you're gonna see some

variation and in fact I in doing

research for the timeline I was amused

to find you know you'd find a master

article like all the Egyptian pharaohs

in Wikipedia and then you go into the

detail on a pharaoh and it would give

different dates than the master articles

so there's still a lot of dispute about

some of this in what we call the

Orthodox for old chronology generally

those disputes aren't too big you know

say plus or minus 10 years but they do

exist and some are some are bigger than

that some less but you'll also see just

minor variations and I wanted to show

everyone that just so people don't get

concerned about little differences

between what I'm going to show you and

what you might find in another source

first here is the issue of the reckoning

of years so we use what's called a

julian year which starts on January 1st

and goes to December 31st but that's not

the year that was used in the ancient

world in fact it's called Julian because

it was created by Julius Caesar so this

is not a way of reckoning the year that

we had until very very late in the

period that were looking at in Israel

they were actually two years used a

Nisan year which started in the spring

and that was the ceremonial year

beginning of the Passover was the 15th

of the month of Nisan so in the spring

there was also a civil year which was

the Tishri year and you'll see that for

some things things are reckoned in one

system and others

reckon any other but that a given year

here a Julian year would actually could

overlap if we're dating things based on

a Nissan or tissue year could overlap

into the year before or the year after

and you're very often will see dates

that written as shown here as you know

586 / 7 so it could be 586 BC it could

be 587 BC depending on where in the year

exactly was and most of the time people

will drop the / so you'll see in my case

I'm just gonna call it 586 it could have

been 587 I'm not worried in the scheme

of things about that plus or minus a

year and you shouldn't be either another

element here quickly as we get through

the Kings but this applies equally when

we talk about Kings and other countries

is the question of how they reckoned the

years of a monarch much of ancient

history is based on you know this event

happened in the 5th year of King X well

how do we know what was the fifth year

how does the fifth year get reckoned it

was only much later with Greece when you

get to the first Olympia and in 776 and

after that a lot of things are reckoned

in the Olympic cycle and we can really

you know work with things like we do

today from a specific date Rome was

reckoned from the founding of Rome in

753 BC so again we can use those dates

in in those two countries but most of

the rest of the world and certainly

everything before that was done based on

the years of a monarch and it was all a

reckoning time over long periods was

based on adding up those years so that

creates a little problem that I'll just

want to bring to everybody's attention

here are Israel and Judah with their

different year reckonings you'll see

there's six months apart so if we have

here's a couple of Kings on the Judah

side 1 reigns for 8 years and then the

other one starts and we just cover the

first official year there and this is

what's called Ascension you're dating

what that means is that the year that

they ascended the throne is years 0

it's the ascension year and then the

first year of their reign is actually

the following year in contrast on the

Israel side they use what's called non

ascension year dating which means that

the year that you ascend to the throne

is your 1 and then the January well

whatever you know in this case March of

the following

here becomes the beginning of year 2 and

when you look at this and how a couple

of you know Kings might reign in the

alternate kingdoms you can quickly see

how you've got seven rain'll years

showing under Israel amounts to only

five years in Judah and that's how you

can get some interesting differences you

also again have this problem potentially

if you were comparing say between

Assyria and Babylon or either of those

in Israel or Judah so just something to

note as to why you may have some small

differences and why something may not

seem to add up if you're trying to do

this by reading kings and chronicles so

let's get started on our little journey

back through history we started the time

of Christ which I have here is 5 BC to

33 AD and there are obviously options

around that and I won't get into that

here but he's clearly in a period where

Rome was the major power in Palestine

Rome conquered Jerusalem in the first

time in 63 BC that was Pompey was the

general that's who the city of Pompeii

is named after he was part of the first

triumvirate with Crassus and Julius

Caesar so that's sort of the historical

context you'll see as we go back here

that I have not only shown kind of who's

the major power in Palestine or later

care earlier canaan and what's going on

there but also trying to throw out some

of the names that might be familiar to

you and events that were taking place in

parallel so in the roman period we have

the end of the Ptolemaic dynasty in

Egypt with Cleopatra you see this you

see Caesar Augustus Julius Caesar and

just before that Spartacus uh

going back to Palestine prior to the

Romans it was the Maccabees and the

Maccabees took power after the Maccabee

in a revolt in 165 you can find the

stories of some of this in the books of

Maccabees which you won't find in a

Protestant Bible but if you have a

Catholic Bible with an Apocrypha you'll

find those books and be able to read

some of that they took over from the

Seleucids so Alexander the Great

conquered the Persian Empire 331 is the

the major battle that really ended

things for the Persians he obviously

didn't live very long after that and

his empire broke apart into four pieces

the two big pieces were the Seleucids

who really covered the area of

Mesopotamia into Syria and Palestine and

the Ptolemies who had Egypt and so the

Seleucids ruled from about 312 BC

through to that Maccabee in revolt which

was really followed out of the

desecration of the temple in 168 by

Antiochus Epiphanes Daniel's little horn

or the abomination of desolation so

that's why he's you see a reference from

Daniel there during that period we had

the Punic Wars with Rome which is where

Hannibal what was involved in the you

know the stories about him going back a

little further the Persian Empire was

running things from Cyrus and his defeat

of Babylon through to the conquest of

Alexander and we have a lot that that

happens in that period in Greek history

we have the battles of Marathon

Thermopylae Salama split Tia the

Peloponnesian War a number of famous

people Herodotus Socrates Plato and

Aristotle who was actually Alexander the

Great's tutor also the book of Esther

falls in this period really at the same

time as the Persian the reco Persian war

and and the battles of Thermopylae and

Salama

so that's really the historical context

there prior to the Persians were the

Babylonians and Nebuchadnezzar really

the Babylonian Empire came to power as

they with the fall of Nineveh in 612

that created a bit of a power vacuum and

a lot of brief resurgence of the power

of Egypt in Palestine which you'll see

there and that was the end then the

interact cause of the interaction

between Necco pharaoh Necho and josiah

leading to Josiah's death and number of

other battles there 605 the Battle of

Carr commish their power was broken by

the Babylonians and thus began the

Babylonian Empire initially placing

Judah under tribute and then ultimately

destroying Jerusalem in 586 the date of

586 is a solid date I think if you print

much conduct consult any his

book you will see a date very close to

that if not that that date so we've

basically gone back and that will be the

date of the end of the kingdom of Judah

which we will use to work backwards to

find the beginning now before we do that

I need to introduce a concept which is

all the new chronologies the old

chronology is what you will find in

pretty much any history book or if you

look things up on Wikipedia to try and

find the dates of various pharaohs

you're gonna get something relatively

close to what I'm showing here on the

top row which is old in the late 1990s a

movement started to identify a new

chronology and the leading figure in

this is a guy named David Rohl he's an

Egyptologist and you may have seen him

if you've seen the patterns of evidence

exodus movie he plays a prominent role

in that he's not the only guy in this

movement by any means but he's really I

think sort of the figurehead at this

time and his PhD thesis work was on the

third Intermediate Period in Egypt and

relooking at the evidence for that and

he came up with a very different

solution than what had been there before

which creates a much compacted third

intermediate period and you'll see here

on the top that purple area is the

traditional third intermediate period

going from the 20th to the 25th

dynasties in Egypt in the new chronology

we have a very compressed period

covering the same dynasties the the last

point of agreement going backwards is

the reign of Pharaoh to har Co which

ends in 664 with the sack of Thebes by a

Hesse rubato poles so that also is a

synchronism between Egyptian history and

Assyrian history so it's a point we can

say hey these line up between these two

kingdoms and we have real confidence

that this is the the correct date or at

least that we've got the right people on

the scene at the same time there the

other thing that happens in this is a

change in the identification of the

pharaoh shishak

so as you may recall after Solomon dies

and

son Rehoboam comes to the throne in the

kingdom splits and Shishak comes in and

I think it's the fifth year of Rio

Bowman's reign and carries off all the

treasures of Jerusalem and the temple

historically this has been identified as

she jumped the first that identification

was made by Shem wholly-owned in the

1820s

when he had first discovered how to read

hieroglyphics and has lasted to this day

it's based on an inscription on a temple

wall I believe at Karnak in Egypt but I

think today people would look at that

said actually he made a mistake the

translation that he came up with for a

certain set of hieroglyphs is is wrong

it didn't say Judah it names another

city and that casts doubt on that

identification the other candidate and

the one that role identifies is Ramses

the great so he would say that Ramses

the great is actually Shishak and you

might say well that name doesn't sound

anything like Shishak however Ram Ramses

had a nickname which was shisha which

sounds a lot more like Shishak and so

there's good reason to believe that that

could be actually the correct

identification and if you are really

interested in this go read Rawls book

Exodus myth or history which explains a

lot of this in much more detail but for

us what I'm gonna do I'm going to

present both timelines but I want folks

to understand that what they are and

what the differences are so that we can

look at this from both sides with this

collapse in the timeline you'll see that

the the date for the beginning of the

third Intermediate Period moves from

1185 BC that's 865 BC so that's a change

of 320 years and it happens to coincide

with the fall of Troy so in the

traditional chronology the fall of Troy

is 1184 BC and the new chronology it's

an 864 BC so a year before this happens

Lots reasonably that that that war

caused the general collapse around the

ancient world and that partly how these

things all link together the other point

to make here is that the changes don't

just affect Egypt

affect some of the other kingdoms that

obviously interacted with Egypt because

if you can say that Pharaoh X interacted

with you know king of Assyria B then you

can link those two together and that

helps helps to refine the dating for

both what we see is though for Assyria

and Babylon the change due to the new

chronology only really takes place in

the 10th century BC so before 900 BC for

tyre and Phoenicia actually they're good

all the way back to almost a thousand BC

and there really is no change in the

dating for Rome from its founding or in

Greece from the first Olympiad there are

some changes in Greek history after the

1st Olympiad that relate to things that

aren't dated or dated in generations and

other things but most of Greek history

is solid from that first Olympiad so

this is the basic concept of this will

become important as we look at Joseph

and the Exodus in a bit so now we can

work our way backwards a little further

to the foundation of the temple so from

the previous slides we know that the

fall of Jerusalem was in 586 BC we also

know from the Assyrian records that the

fall of the Samaria in the Kingdom of

Israel was in 723 BC and we can work

back along both of those lines and we

get to the same date for the end of

Solomon's reign which is in 930 so

Solomon reigned for forty years that

puts the beginning of his reign in 970

and first Kings 61 tells us that the

temple foundation was laid in the fourth

year of his reign and that's really our

critical date 966 BC what we see here

the dates of all the kings are based on

the work of a guy named Edwin Thiele or

Thiel II and he's really the definitive

work on this subject the majority

opinion if you will there are some later

modifications to his work but I think if

you sit if you stick with these dates

you'll be on very solid ground they

those modifications don't really shift

Solomon there they're dealing with some

of the things that you see here where

there's overlaps and Currie agencies and

Hezekiah and other things so we're on

pretty solid

here some key things in this period of

time 7:01 is sennacherib's besieged in

jerusalem that's also recorded by

Herodotus you'll see the blue triangles

are events that we can find not only in

historical records but also in the Bible

the black triangles are things that are

only on the historical side but some of

those are critical to nailing down these

dates and in particular in 853 a hab

fought against shaman easer the third at

the Battle of Carcar an 841 12 years

later J who was paying tribute to shaman

ease or the third to the same King and

we find those from the Assyrian records

the interesting thing is in the in

Scripture there's only 12 years between

those two kings and what that means is

that a hab must have fought against

shaman easer in the very last year of

his reign and Jehu must have paid

tribute in the very first year of his

reign and that allows us to lock in

basically the dates for most of the

Kingdom of Israel is is those two

synchronism with Assyria

recall that the Assyrian timeline back

through this period does not change in

the old and new chronology so the

chronology for Israel also doesn't

change it's solid we do see some changes

which we noted before you see Shi Xiong

can Ramsay and how they have moved

around also in the new chronology you

can then date Agamemnon from the Iliad

and the fall of Troy and those become

much more rooted in history than than

saying the myth that they are really as

considered in the Orthodox chronology so

you have a lot going on here but this is

really as far back as we go with Greek

and sort of therefore Western history

and the things that we're familiar with

and things start to get a lot more murky

once we get back before a thousand BC as

we'll see there's more debate about the

timelines and and and who's when so here

I need to make an important point before

we make the jump to the Exodus about

Ramses the second a lot of people that I

know believe that Ramses the second is

the Pharaoh of the Exodus and including

my father and that older generation

that's kind of what they were taught

growing up and there's a good reason for

that

if you look at Exodus 111 it says that

when they enslaved the Israelites they

had them build treasure cities or supply

cities name in particular a city called

Rameses and the city of Rameses only

existed for a short period of time and

was built by Rameses degree so it's

pretty logical to say well if they built

ramasees then must be Ramses the great

who was the Pharaoh of the exodus right

um but there's a big problem with that

logic there is another verse that dates

the Exodus and it puts it well before

the reign of Ramses no matter and if we

saw in the new chronology Ramses is

contemporary with Solomon so clearly it

didn't happen in his reign it couldn't

in that chronology and even in the old

chronology he's really too late for the

dates of the Exodus and we'll see that

in a minute also all the archaeological

and and sort of other textual evidence

would say that ramses ii is not the

Pharaoh of the exodus there was just

absolutely no evidence to place the

Exodus in that period of time now how do

you deal with the scripture well the

children of Israel did build a city at

the site that later became known as

Ramses but they did that in an earlier

time when that city had a different name

which is a Voris

so what happened well we believe that

the name Rameses was a later addition or

update that happened perhaps during the

time of Solomon when that city was being

constructed or even perhaps a little bit

later but that the the Hebrew scribes

updated the reference because the old

name was no longer in use and they

wanted it to still be clear as to where

this had happened that named Rameses is

actually also used for where where jacob

and the children of israel settle in in

Goshen at a time clearly hundreds of

years before the city even existed so

it's this good reason to believe it was

really an update and you think about

that to give a good American example if

you said you were born in New York in

1650 well that wouldn't really quite be

correct because in 1650 New York was

known as New Amsterdam it was a Dutch

colony but if we speak about it today we

would obviously use the name New York

because that's the name that we're from

with however at the time of the events

occurred it had a different name and

that's a sense of what we're dealing

with here that yes they did build a city

they did build upon exactly that

location but at the time it was known

under a different name

so given all that we can cross ramses ii

off of our list as potential pharaohs of

the exodus so let's go see who that

might have actually been well if we work

backward before Solomon remember the

temple was foundation was laid in the

fourth year of Solomon's reign 966 BC

and there's a scripture first Kings 6:1

which says that the exodus took place

480 years before that date so simple

math would say that the exodus was in

1446 BC now the question of who the

Pharaoh is gets a little bit tougher and

depending on which chronology you look

at in the Orthodox chronology that puts

you in the reign of Amenhotep ii or

somewhere about there his father taught

most the third potentially depending on

which chronology you're using and that's

what these dates slip around a little

bit but that's that's an idea of where

the the exodus isn't the old chronology

in the new chronology it's during what's

known as the very end of the 13th

dynasty

depending on how you look at at the end

of the Egyptian Middle Kingdom or the

beginning of the second Intermediate

Period from a really unknown guy named

due to mos I mean that's a name similar

to that is what the Egyptian historian

many folk gives as the name of the

Pharaoh when these things happen so

that's that's a really good candidate

some other things that that go on in

this period of time well we have the

period of the judges and the judges is

really a mess in terms of trying to nail

things down scripturally the events of

the judges all added up and it's

referenced in the new testament is 450

years but that doesn't include the

period from during the wilderness it

doesn't include the period where joshua

and the elders were still on the scene

and it doesn't include samuel or saul so

what you put all those in you have about

600 years actually or David 600 plus

years do you have to squeeze

into 480 and it just doesn't work there

also is only one internal reference that

you can really latch on to in that

period and that's Jephthah that he was

300 years after Israel came to to the

borders of Canaan so he's the only one

that we can really kind of nail down in

the middle there's just lots of

guesswork and different theories on on

all the other judges I'm showing here my

solution which I've explained on the

biblical timeline website but there are

clearly others and this is a question

that we'll probably never really get

resolved unless we get some amazing

archaeological discovery that that nails

down one or more of the other folks that

you see here another point to make here

is that in the line of Christ which you

see up there in purple nation solomon

boaz obon jesse leading to david they're

clearly our missing generations in here

we know that solomon married Rahab so we

have to tie him to the period of the

conquest

we know that Jesse's the father of David

so we have to tie him at the end so that

leaves a period of 400 years or so where

we only have two names Boaz and obut and

so there is a practice this is well come

back to this later that you kind of name

the significant ancestors along the way

so we don't know where to place Boaz and

Obed other than during this period and

it raises the possibility that some of

our dates we start getting back to the

flood question may be off but we'll

cross that bridge when we come to it

another just key point to make here

going back to the Egyptian side I have

flagged Akhenaten in both timelines and

the Amarna letters the key thing about

those is that the Kings that are writing

to Hakka Naughton from Canaan are

complaining about a group called the

Habiru

which some have associated with the

Hebrews that are kind of making their

presence known and encroaching on

Pharaoh's lands Egypt Egypt is the major

power in Canaan through this whole

period they're really the power behind

the scenes although at different degrees

if you go with the Orthodox chronology

this is a peer

of high power for Egypt up until the

beginning of the 20th dynasty if you go

with the new chronology it's actually a

period the beginnings are a period of

really low power for Egypt and it's only

with Amenhotep the first that they come

back to a significant level of power and

that seems to fit a bit better with the

biblical story the other interesting

thing about the Amarna letters if you go

with rolls interpretation is that in the

new chronology you have a guy named

Libya where you can equate with Saul and

his son football who equates with ish

Bichette and potentially David is also

mentioned in those letters so really

interesting kind of chronological aside

but again the new chronology is far from

settled and far from the majority

opinion at this point the other

interesting point is that the kings of

the fifteenth dynasty in a varis the

same city that was built by the Hebrews

earlier according to the new chronology

are Greeks and that makes for a very

interesting story the archaeology

illogical evidence does support that so

very interesting finds in the last

twenty years or so but that then leads

on to the Greeks of the heroic age all

the way up to the the conquest of Troy

so bottom line though we have a date now

for the Exodus in 1446 BC and we need

that to work out when Jacob and Joseph

would have been in Egypt so we now have

the question how long was Israel in

Egypt anyway and there's two views here

so this is the first really significant

dispute that we have in our chronology

and there are two options the first is

called the long sojourn if you read your

typical Christian Bible it's based on

what's called the Masoretic text the

oldest version of that text we have is

about a thousand AD and it says very

simply the sojourn of the children in

Israel in Egypt was 430 years this is

backed up by the Dead Sea Scrolls which

have basically exactly the same language

for that verse so he would say okay it's

430 years from Jacob and the children of

Israel arriving in Egypt until the

however you have the alternate theory

based on the the Greek version of the

Old Testament what's known as the

Septuagint would tell you that now the

time that they spend in Egypt and Canaan

was 430 years this was a view that was

held in the New Testament by Paul you'll

see here a quote from Galatians and it's

also the view of Josephus our key

ancient historian who would say that you

know it was actually 430 years from when

Abraham came into Canaan and only 215

from when Jacob came into Egypt until

the Exodus so those are our two views

and let's see how that works out on our

timeline first of all we need to

understand the 215 years you can

actually do the math very simply from

Scripture Genesis 12 Ford says that

Abraham arrived in Cain at the age of 75

Isaac's born when it when he's a hundred

so there's 25 years right there Jacobs

born when Isaac is 60 and then Jacob is

130 years old when he comes into Egypt

so you add all those up you get two

hundred fifteen years so that is kind of

the basis essentially for splitting the

430 into two equal two hundred fifteen

year segments we have right here

how the years add up to get to that

number and get the difference so let's

talk about the sojourn this is a little

bit complicated in the middle we have

the the patriarchs Abraham Isaac and

Jacob and the years of plenty in the

lean years Jacob comes to Egypt in the

third lean year we also have Joseph at

the top we have the Orthodox chronology

and how that works and at the bottom we

have the new chronology so what's really

interesting here is if you read the text

of the Joseph's story in my mind very

clearly it's taking place in a united

and strong Egypt given the date that

we're starting from 1446 the we have to

go back into a period known as the

Middle Kingdom and the 12th dynasty to

get a strong United Egypt

so other salut

which would place the place Joseph in a

period of the Hyksos or when Egypt was

divided and weak just don't seem to

really actually fit this story so from

my perspective those are not options we

have to look for options that place the

place Joseph in that late 12th dynasty

late Middle Kingdom and interestingly

enough if we use a long sojourn

following the Masoretic text in the

Orthodox controlled chronology we get

exactly that the Joseph falls in the

rain initially of sin Nusrat the second

and then his sons news throughout the

third and and potentially into the rain

regency of amendment the the third it

was a son of seducer at the third so in

those three kings and egypt now if we

map those same three kings and go to the

new chronology and use now a short

sojourn of two hundred fifteen years we

end up pretty much on the same place

with the arrival of jacob in the old

chronology is in the early reign of

sinistra at the third and the new

chronology it would be later in his

reign where he's already made his son a

madam at the third is co-regent but

we're pretty close to the same period of

time here so i find that very very

interesting and basically the position i

take here is if you want to stick with

the old chronology you have to go with a

long sojourn to get you to the late 12th

dynasty late Middle Kingdom if however

you are going to use the new chronology

you really need to use that short

sojourn to end up in the same spot so

we'll have different dates for the time

that Joseph was and Jacob we're in Egypt

but the same Egyptian kings which is

sort of the interesting twist on this so

where does that leave us well I think at

this point it's good to have a little

bit of a recap we've started with the

time of Christ you know going back from

1 BC we get to 586 as the fall of

Jerusalem 966 as the foundation of the

temple that answers our question number

6 when did the Hebrew Kings live we can

jump back

another 480 years based on first Kings

6:1 and understand that that was

bracketing the period when the judges

ruled our question number five and that

also gets us to the exodus our question

number four so we have solid dates for

all of those things now it gets a little

bit more complicated if we stick with

the old chronology then Jacob arrives in

each of an 1876 BC so 430 years before

the Exodus if we go with the new

chronology he arrives in 1661 BC 215

years before the Exodus

in either case we can then add 215 years

to get back to Abraham's arrival in

Canaan and then another 75 to get back

to his birth and that gets us to 2166 BC

or in the old chronology or 1951 BC in

the new so that's essentially where we

are we've answered questions 3 through 6

of our 7 we're not really going to

address 7 he was actually on one of the

charts I've shown you already but we

want to answer questions 1 & 2 so how do

we get back to the flood unto creation

so now we have to work our way back to

the flood and to do that we really only

have the text the text specifically to

get to the flood is Genesis 11 and that

gives the generations from the flood up

through Terah and then on to Abraham so

that is our basis though the problem we

have here is there are two different

versions the Masoretic which is used in

most Christian Bibles and then the Greek

Septuagint which actually predate

predates the earliest copies of the vasa

retic about 1300 years so there's reason

to believe that they may actually be

more more accurate also the Septuagint

is what was quoted from for the most

part in the New Testament

so clearly Jesus and the Apostles gave

it a lot of credibility

it was the text that they were used to

and also though potentially because

they're writing in Greek it was much

more convenient to quote from the Greek

Old Testament but clearly from them it

has credibility so the the important

differences here come in the D

generations basically what age was each

person when they gave gave birth or had

that

next person in line and what you'll see

is in the masa retic they're fairly

young they're in their 20s to mid-30s

whereas in the septuagint it's about a

hundred years later in most cases except

for Nahor where it's a fifty year

difference and what that means is that

from the flood to the birth of Abraham

there's a pretty big difference about

six hundred and fifty eight years

between the two to cover that that span

of time so that raises some interesting

questions so let's look at this a little

differently let's look at it graphically

so if we graph this and I've also put up

your Genesis 5 so Genesis 5 covers the

time from Adam to Noah so everything

before the flood and Genesis 11 covers

the period after the flood now one thing

you might ask is well what about the

Dead Sea Scrolls right you used that

before the problem is that we don't have

any extant fragments from the Dead Sea

Scrolls for Genesis 5 in Genesis 11

except for one small fragment of one

verse in Genesis 5 which does agree with

the Masoretic text but it's not enough

to really lock all this down it would be

great if we had a complete copy but

we'll go with what we have which is the

masa retic which is complete and

obviously the Septuagint also complete

you'll see in both cases the Septuagint

has more years from the birth of each

person to the birth of their son the

next the next generation there are a few

exceptions they agree on Jared the

Septuagint actually slightly shorter on

with with Methuselah to Lamech and

there's a slight difference but not big

between Lamech for Landman going to Noah

Noah to his kids is consistent in both

Shem is consistent in both but then

again we have that gap through until we

get to Terah Abraham and Isaac so

there's a opportunity to add a lot of

years in here the other thing that I

wanted to note and that's the red circle

is you'll see that there's kind of a

discontinuity in the mass mass Heretic

that clear there's a decline in ages as

as time goes by people don't live as

long in the Masoretic though you get

this

weird uptick for uber and then a

significant drop for peleg now that

could be kind of post Tower of Babel

that peleg is the is is the key person

at that point in time um or maybe

something else the septuagint however

much more consistent sort of a linear

decline there's kind of a little bump

around sirak but for a much more

consistent decline in age is much more

what you would really expect if there is

a decay in DNA or other things that's

causing the lifespans to be shortened so

just want to draw that to your attention

but I am NOT going to make a decision

between Masoretic and Septuagint I'm

going to leave that up to you but I want

to put those options out there the other

thing just to note is in for those

before the flood the lifespans are

pretty much the same in both texts

there's a little difference for LA Mac

but again the lifespans are different

between from our fax ad down to Nate or

in Genesis 11 so that brings me to

trying to answer questions one or two

what about creation and what about the

flood and there are four options here

based on what we've learned so far

if you follow a sure now you would end

up with a short sojourn and a master

etic text that is the closest to him uh

sure is off about 45 years with Solomon

altogether is a difference of 53 years

I'm not sure at this point where the

other 8 year difference comes from but

the first 45 is from his solution to the

Kings which it was before a lot more

modern scholarship and I think it's good

reason to believe that he was off on

that one but the interesting thing is

that uh sure's dates are the latest

dates for creation of the flood of the

different the four options that were

given here so pretty much any other

solution will get you to something

earlier than 4004 BC or 391 BC for

creation in my example if you follow the

Septuagint on the short sojourn and the

lifespans of the the patriarchs from

Adam to to Terah you get back as far as

almost 5200 BC for create

a flood at roughly 3000 BC if you use

the longer sojourn and the septuagint

Bay following the old college you get

back as far as 5,400 BC for creation and

actually in the Septuagint there is an

extra generation that I did not include

because it's not attested anywhere else

there's an extra Canaan that would add

even another 130 years so you could go

all the way back move all these dates on

the Septuagint side back another 130

years so you get to some fairly fairly

old dates now I think most secular

scholars would still put the beginning

of civilization and reasonably maybe the

flood at 10,000 BC that there may be

generations that are missing I tend to

doubt it in Genesis 5 and 11 because it

gives the ages but it's possible so it

could be earlier but these are the dates

that you get from Scripture under these

two different approaches and

interpretations and really any of these

dates could be correct there's pluses

and minuses to all of them but I tend to

go with the Septuagint version because

based on what we know of Egyptian and

Assyrian history uh sure's dates I think

are just too late we need to look at

something that's that's a bit earlier

and I'll show you why just to kind of

leave you in the new chronology here is

the whole period from Moses back to the

flood the period before the flood is

kind of not interesting it's the same

list of names it's just a question of

how long you stretch out that timeline

but we get some interesting things here

and this is the complete timeline not

just for the patriarchs but also for

Egypt's based on what we know and also

for the civilizations of Mesopotamia

based on the Sumerian Kings list and

what I've done here is highlighted in

red some of the names that you might be

familiar with or most familiar with in

this on the lower right we've got

Hammurabi so he's actually a

contemporary or just before Moses and

he's really the one that makes Babylon

great prior to that there are a number

of other kingdoms that become Babylon

or that that predated it or of the

Chaldees being one and we see that Tara

probably left or of the Chaldees in a

period where it had lost its importance

that going to a Cod which was the

predecessor of the Syrian kingdoms and

Sargon the first being the first great

king of a Cod going back further we are

in the kingdom of Iraq as it's called in

the first three dynasties of that and

that is what takes us back potentially

to the flood we have Gilgamesh appearing

in there we have cushioned Nimrod have

been identified by role as the first two

kings of that dynasty now he stretches

it out before the flood because he adds

the extra 130 years for Canaan but you

could kind of compress this a little bit

to get to a birth of cush just after the

the flood and that would all work also

in Egypt for those of you who are fans

of the mummy and Scorpion King

franchises I've kind of put up him

hoteth there and scorpion for those who

might wonder the motive is clearly not

joseph he's just way way too early and

there is solid evidence of Joseph

archaeologically that you can find in

that 12th dynasty so lastly I put the

Great Pyramid in the Tower of Babel so

interesting the Great Pyramid was built

after the Tower of Babel so there may be

a link there and I think some some would

say there's really good chance that

there is but that's it so that gets us

back to the beginning and that's the

overall overview the chronology I hope

that you've enjoyed that we are at an

end

if you want to know more about this

there is more on the biblical timeline

website there's an article on Joseph

there's an article on the judges and

there is another video on the period of

the kings and there will be more as I

have time to put it together so thanks

again for everything and I hope you

enjoyed the video

NEXT

The timeline from creation to Abraham should be the easiest to establish.  We have in Genesis 5 and Genesis 11 the generations from Adam to Abraham including the years from the birth of each to the birth of the next generation – exactly what we need to construct a timeline.  But something doesn’t add up.
Most Bibles that we have today use the Masoretic Text for the old testament.  This is the ‘official’ Hebrew text and we have manuscripts dating back to around 1000 AD. However, there are three other versions of the text that we can use:
Septuagint or LXX.  In the third century BC, the king of Egypt, Ptolemy II Philadelphus (309-246 BC), gathered 70 (or 72) Jewish scholars to translate the Hebrew scriptures into Greek.  This became the authoritative Greek translation (similar to the King James in English) and was widely used in both Jewish and Christian circles until at least the 4th century AD.
Samaritan Pentateuch. The Samaritans maintained their own version of the five books of Moses going back to the second temple period. It is generally believed to date from before 100 BC.
Ethiopic.  The Bible also exists in Ge’ez, the liturgical language of Ethiopia.  Ge’ez is a dead language that, much like Latin, continues in religious use.  The Ethiopic is generally believed to be derived from the Septuagint (see Acts 8:27-40) in the 4th century AD, and as we will see closely matches that version.  However, Ethiopia also had a significant Jewish population and with it a Hebrew tradition, and we should consider that this may have influenced the Ge’ez.
We also have some other ancient extra-biblical sources:
Demetrius the Chronographer wrote in Alexandria circa 220 BC, or less than 50 years after the translation of the Septuagint.  Fragments of his work are preserved in Eusebius (see below) and Clement.
Epolemus, a Jewish historian, wrote circa 160 BC and is preserved only in fragments, notably in Clement.
Pseudo-Philo (so called because the work was originally attributed incorrectly to Philo of Alexandria) wrote the Liber Antiquitatum Biblicarum, or LAB in the first century AD which includes a genealogy from Adam through Noah
Flavius Josephus recorded the genealogies in his Antiquities of the Jews written shortly after the destruction of the second temple in 69 AD.  In this work he provides a parallel account that largely matches the Septuagint.  Some believe that this is because Josephus used the Greek Septuagint as a basis for his work.  However, Josephus claims that he worked directly from Hebrew texts (Ant. 1:5, 9:208, 10:218; Against Apion 1:1, 54).  This suggests that the Hebrew texts of his time matched the Septuagint.
Eusebius recorded the Hebrew, Samaritan, and Septuagint as they were available to him in approximately 325 AD in his Chronicle. He is an important witness as to the condition of the texts at that time.
Henry B Smith, Jr. provides a nice scholarly summary of these sources and their relevance in his article The Case for the Septuagint’s Chronology in Genesis 5 and 11
What about the Dead Sea Scrolls?  Unfortunately, Genesis 5 and 11 are almost entirely absent from the available fragments of the Dead Sea Scrolls.  Only one scroll (Genesis 4Q2) contains even a fragment of these two chapters.  That scroll has a single word from Genesis 5:12 or 13 which reads “Kenan (Cainan)”. Unfortunately, this provides zero information in our quest to establish the correct timeline. Note that some online versions of the Dead Sea Scrolls, (For example) complete this verse with the Masoretic text, but they are just guessing. 
The table below shows the number of years between generations according to each version of each major text.  For example, the intersection of Adam and the Masoretic text shows 130 years, indicating that Adam lived 130 years before his son Seth was born.  White cells indicate agreement with the Masoretic text.  Red cells indicate a disagreement with the Masoretic text that is unique to a particular version.  Yellow cells indicate a disagreement with the Masoretic that is supported by one other source.  Green cells indicate a disagreement with the Masoretic that is supported by at least two other sources.  The rows for the flood and Abraham provide totals up to that point.

While Eusebius agrees almost universally with the begetting ages in each text, there are a number of differences on the remaining years and ages at death but I don’t have the space to show them here.
**See discussion of Kainan below
The first thing that strikes me in the above is that when a text differs from the Masoretic, that difference is most often exactly 100 years higher. This pattern indicates intentional editing vs. some of the unique differences which are more likely scribal errors.  However, it leaves open the question of which is the original and which is the edited text. The period after the Flood has essentially all of the other sources in alignment with each other but in disagreement with the Masoretic text.  Before the Flood, however, the Masoretic and Samaritan Pentateuch (SP) tend to agree with each other while the various versions of the Septuagint (LXX) and Josephus are in agreement with each other but disagree with the Masoretic text until the time of Methuselah.
Below are some thoughts on the table above:
Adam to Mahalalel: For the first five generations, the Masoretic and Samaritan texts match exactly, as do all versions of the Septuagint, including the Ge’ez.  However, each generation in the LXX is exactly 100 years longer, adding 500 years to the time interval between Creation and the Flood in that version. As noted above, the exact 100 year difference is curious and likely the result of a deliberate edit.  Which version is the original is however not clear.
Jared: Jared shows almost complete agreement across all versions with the exception of the Samaritan as quoted by Eusebius.  I think we can be confident that 162 years is correct for Jared to Enoch. Though perhaps we should ask why Jared is not 100 years less in the Masoretic?
Enoch: For Enoch we see the same pattern that we had for Adam through Mahalalel, a 100 year difference. The name that Enoch gave to his son was likely prophetic (see below).
Methuselah: Now things get interesting! We have four different numbers given for the generation from Methuselah to Lamech.  In the Masoretic text, when we combine this with the generations given for Lamech and Noah and Noah’s age at the time of the flood, we see that Methuselah died in the year of the flood.  This is particularly interesting when you consider that one possible translation of his name is “his death will send”.  We can reject the shorter timelines given in the Samaritan and some versions of the LXX as they would then place his death after the flood – an impossibility. It’s also interesting to me that in this particular place, Josephus, the Ge’ez, and LAB match the Masoretic.  Given this, I think we can be comfortable that 187 years is the correct generation from Methuselah to Lamech.
Lamech: For the same reason we accepted 187 years for Methuselah to Lamech, we should accept 182 years for Lamech to Noah.  As with Methuselah it is interesting that Josephus, LAB, and the Ge’ez match the Masoretic here and not the LXX.
Noah and Shem: Here the texts are in complete agreement with the exception of Josephus who for some unknown reason adds 10 years to Noah’s age at the birth of Shem (probably a scribal error).  Now Genesis 5:32 states that, “Noah was five hundred years old, and Noah begot Shem, Ham, and Japheth”. Genesis 7:11 states that the flood was, “in the six hundredth year of Noah’s life”, which would make Shem 100 at the time of the flood.  However, Genesis 11:10 gives Shem’s age as, “”one hundred years old, and he begot Arphaxad two years after the flood”.  The reconciliation between these passages is simple: Noah began to have his sons at the age of 500, but Shem was not the first born and was born two years later.  Genesis 10 may give the true birth order in listing the following generations in the order of Japheth, Ham, and then Shem, but this is just speculation. Note however that Genesis 10:21 calls Japheth, “the elder”, likely indicating that he was the first born.
The Flood: If we consider that we must accept 187 years from Methuselah to Lamech and 182 years from Lamech to Noah, then we have two possible choices for the time from Creation to the Flood.  Following the Masoretic text gives us 1,656 years and following Josephus or the Ge’ez which have the correct numbers for both gives us 2,256 years – exactly 600 years longer with those years coming from adding 100 years each to Adam through Mahalalel and to Enoch.
Arphaxad: With Arphaxad we continue the pattern of the Septuagint being 100 years higher than the Masoretic, but interestingly from this point onward the Samaritan matches the Septuagint and not the Masoretic and so we have the preponderance of sources supporting the longer timeline.
Kainan: The Septuagint and the Ethiopic include Kainan, an additional generation that is not attested elsewhere. However, Kainan is attested in Luke’s genealogy (Luke 3:36) and appears in Genesis 10:24 in the Septuagint.   Kainan’s age at the birth of his son and his total lifespan are identical to that given for the next generation, Salah.  Given this and the absence of Kainan in other versions of the Septuagint, notably Josephus and Eusebius, Kainan is generally believed to be a scribal error.  However, Henry B Smith of the Associates for Biblical Research makes arguments for Kainan’s inclusion here: New Evidence for Kainan in New Testament and LXX Papyri and also here:  Associates for Biblical Research.  I have gone back and forth on including the years associated with Kainan in my timeline, but for now have chosen to include him for consistency with the Septuagint.
Salah to Nahor: For the period from Salah through Serug, we have a consistent pattern with the Septuagint and Samaritan texts providing a period between generations that is 100 years longer than the Masoretic.  Including the 100 year difference for Arphaxad, this adds a total of 600 years.  For Nahor, the Septuagint and Samaritan add 50 years.  There are only minor differences in the various Septuagint texts with Eusebius adding three years for Reu and Josephus apparently reversing the numbers for Reu and Serug.  Josephus inexplicably gives a number of 120 for Nahor. 
Terah: With Terah, we finally reach a point where all of the texts agree.  Note that Terah lived an additional 135 years (to the age of 205) and Abraham departed Haran for Canaan at the age of 75, or when Terah was 145 years old.  Thus Abraham departed Canaan while his father was still alive.
Abraham: The bottom line in our table above is that, depending on the source used, the time from creation until the birth of Abraham is likely 1,950 years, following the Masoretic, or approximately 3,300 years following the Septuagint.  Comparing the various Septuagint texts, I believe that the Ethiopic is likely the best record of the original text with a total of 3,326 year from creation to the birth of Abraham.
An interesting point that is only noticed when trying to graph each person on a timeline is that, following the Masoretic text, Shem outlives Abraham.  This is not the case in the other translations, and in my mind lends credibility to the Septuagint.  Consequently, The Biblical Timeline uses the ages and lifespans from the Septuagint for the period after the flood. An academic discussion of the different texts and why the Septuagint may have the correct set of numbers can be found here: MT, SP, or LXX? Deciphering a Chronological and Textual Conundrum in Genesis 5
The graph above shows the generations from Shem to Joseph according to the three primary manuscripts.  As you can see, there is less agreement between the Samaritan and the Septuagint on the life spans in this period than there is on the age at the birth of the next generation.  One of the things that I like about the Septuagint here is that the life spans seem to follow an exponential decay curve which is what I would expect.
For those of you that ascribe significance to the numbers, I place the birth of Abraham in 1,951 BC (Exodus in 1,446 + 430 years from Abraham’s entry into Canaan until the Exodus + Abraham’s age of 75 at entry into Canaan).  Thus following the Masoretic text, the years from creation to the birth of Abraham are approximately the same as the years from the birth of Abraham to the birth of Christ, and again approximately the same as the number of years from the birth of Christ to the restoration of the state of Israel.  Using the date of 1,951 BC for the birth of Abraham gives use the following dates for creation and the flood:
*Note that Usher’s chronology has a date of 4,004 BC.  Usher had Solomon about 50 years earlier than modern chronologies, among other errors that altogether pushed his date for creation 105 years earlier
At this point we should come back to our early extra-biblical sources.  Josephus, states that the history of the Jewish people covers 5,000 years, a number consistent with only the longer chronology of the Septuagint and Ge’ez.  Demetrius the Chronographer places creation in 5,307 BC and the flood in 3,043 BC, again consistent only with the higher numbers.  Epolomus agrees with Demetrius in giving a date for creation of 5,307 BC.  While many will insist on holding to the traditional, Masoretic text, the evidence indicates that both ancient Hebrew authors and the early church fathers consistently placed creation before 5,000 BC. Finally, our current understanding of Egyptian history cannot support a later date for the flood in 2,200 BC, but could support an earlier date of about 3,000 BC.  Thus, the earlier dates in the Septuagint and Ge’ez are also a better fit with what we know from archaeology.



NEXT

welcome to the very first video from the

biblical timeline I chose to start with

kings and chronicles and the reason for

that is that the reign of Solomon is

really the anchor point for all earlier

biblical chronology and that will come

up in future videos and we'll talk

through kind of why that is and and what

that means but at this point it's very

important to get that particular date

correct and to do that we have to work

our way back through the other Kings to

nail down the dates for Solomon's reign

and the basis for this the basis for

what you see in the biblical timeline is

a set of Raynald dates developed by a

guy named Edwin Thiele II north Ile and

he first published his work as a

doctoral thesis in a journal in 1944 and

then I think a few years later with a

book the last edition of which was

published in 1983 it's called the

mysterious numbers of the Hebrew kings

here's a quote from deal chronology the

backbone of history without exact

chronology there can be no exact history

until a correct chronology of a nation

has been established the events of that

nation cannot be correctly integrated

into the events of neighboring states

deal was very big on making sure that

his chronology lined up with what we

knew in terms of Assyria but also

Babylon and and Egypt some of the

earlier chronology is most famously that

of Usher

did not have the benefit of archaeology

and what you'll see is that deals dates

for Solomon are about 45 years later

than what asure had come to as also some

other earlier criminologists so Thea's

work is really the mainstream set of

numbers I think it's the most widely

accepted at this point a lot of

scholarship here and because it does tie

out very neatly with that of the

neighboring kingdoms it's really the

standard at this point there are other

proposals obviously out there and and

various views but this is really what I

would call the mainstream view a

a lot of what is done here relies on

what we call synchronism x' and a

synchronism is here's a very good

example from Luke something like this we

have the first verse there the days of

Herod the king of Judea is relates to

the birth of John the Baptist and we

know Jesus was born six months later

second part here came to pass in the

days of Caesar Augustus and then there's

also a reference to corniest as governor

of Syria so you kind of have three

people now the problem with this one is

that corniest was not governor of Syria

until after Herod that was dead so this

particular synchronism creates some

issues and their various solutions to

this I won't go into those now there's

sort of a lot written about this but

that's not what we're talking about

today but this is essentially how dates

were established in the ancient world

with the exception of Greece and Rome

most ancient civilizations did not

reckon time from a fixed date they would

typically do it by the rain'll years of

the kings so you know Herod the Great

you could say hey in the tenth year of

Herod the Great that would be thirty

seven minus ten would be 27 BC and you

could reckon a date that way or you

would use synchronism says Luke has done

saying hey it was when Herod was the

king and when Caesar Caesar Augustus was

raining and something else and that

would help you narrow it down to

hopefully one or a very few number of

years so that you had a narrow window in

terms of that date feels very big on

synchronism x' and he uses synchronism

with Assyria Babylon in Egypt has ways

of establishing the dates and making

sure that his chronology is solid and

lines up with what's happening in the

rest of the world so lots of people had

tried to solve this before Thiele and

the reason it's it's problematic is you

have to understand a lot about what is

going on in terms of how the how Israel

and Judah and actually also the other

civilizations around them how they

actually reckoned dates and how they

reckoned rain'll years and the like and

if you don't understand this then things

just will not add up so the first thing

that Thiele identified was that Israel

and Judah were using two different

reckoning methods Israel's year start

Nissan which is in the spring the

Passover is on the 14th of Nisan so

think about it around Easter time and

Judah reckoned their dates from the

civil New Year which was in the fall so

six months later September October the

other key thing was that Israel used non

ascension you're dating and Judah used

Ascension you're dating and we'll

explain that here momentarily so if we

just look at the years though they don't

line up so what is late in year one for

Judah would actually be the beginning of

your - in Israel and that's one way that

you can get dates that don't quite work

out

when we get into the Raynald dates so

let's think about a couple of kings of

Judah here the first one begins to reign

in year one dies in year nine and is

succeeded by King number two Ascension

you're dating basically means that you

don't count the year that you come to

the throne so here the first king we

don't count your one that's actually a

year zero it's we call the ascension

year and the first year of that King

actually begins on Tishri in year two

and you know second Tishri of year three

and so on when that King dies in his

eighth year in year nine he's succeeded

by the second king and again year nine

is not double counted here it's your

zero of that second king and then your

10 is your 1 and and so on basic

ascension you're dating there's no

double counting of years each year only

ever gets counted once in this system on

the contrary if we look at Israel let's

take our first king here comes to the

throne at exactly the same time but in

the non ascension system that fractional

first year is counted so year one would

be the sort of quarter year at the at

the back end of year one first of Dees

on in year to become begins year two for

that king that King dies in year four

now what's interesting is what is that

King is a year four is only a year two

for the opposing king in Judah so we're

actually off by two years here because

of the timing in the year when that

change happens if we put another king in

that reign say three years

again we count now you'll see we're

counting your four twice it's your four

of King the first King and you're one of

the second King so there's a double

count and after that King has ruined

three years now this case he dies in the

latter part of the year so the year is

already turned over in Judah and we're

in year five but we're still off by two

years and what you'll see here is

between these two systems as you stacked

up several reigns every time you

introduce a new king in Israel you you

double county here and you get off by

one year on the Judah side you can also

get off based on the March versus

September and where the transaction our

transition actually takes takes place so

that's the that's the first problem this

is complicated by the fact that the two

kingdoms didn't consistently reckon

their years in one system or the other

we believe that the United Kingdom used

the Ascension here reckoning and that

continued in Judah up until Apple ayah

which she was the daughter of a hab so

she came from Israel would have been

used to that system and deal believed

that she was responsible for changing

Judah to the non ascension air system

going back actually to her husband Joe

harms rain and then her son a Isaiah and

also to her son to her grandson joash

her son joash maybe actually probably

not her son but in that same generation

so those three or four kings are counted

in the non ascension year reckoning and

then do two switches back to ascension

erecting reckoning beginning with the

Isaiah and going on through to the end

Israel on the other hand consistently

use non ascension year reckoning up

through Jehovah has and basically at the

same time that a Messiah is coming to

the throne they switched this is with

joash and they used ascension your

reckoning through to the end so if

things weren't confusing enough with the

two systems now you have actually the

two kingdoms switching back and forth in

terms of which one they're using so

that's kind of enough to make your head

explode but that is the basis for how

Thiel gets to a lot of his dates the

other thing that he identified the

second problem is what I'll call Co

regencies and rival rains this is

actually this Kem's right from a page in

his book on the Israel side there's a

very clear situation with Omri and Tibby

where their rivals they're both raining

Israel and their warring between the two

and Omri finally wins but there's a

period of overlap same kind of thing

happens with Menahem and then his

successor pacaya and Pekka and that's

referenced in Hosea 5:5 but not really

in Kings 4 chronicles and then other

than that you have a bunch of co-regency

so a co-regency would be where the king

puts his son on the throne before he

dies and so now you're sort of double

counting so it might be your 10 of the

king but it's also now you're one of his

son and then your 11 of the king is your

two of the son and so on so you have

this dual dating thing going on with

these courageous sees and typically the

co regencies would occur when there was

some need or there's some uncertainty

about the kingship so in the case of

joash and Jeroboam ii hey the King

Jehoiachin going off to fight a war

let's put the son on the throne make

clear what the succession is just in

case I get killed in in battle on the

Judah side we have AUSA he has his

disease in the feet so he's ill so he

puts his son on the throne gets his son

some experience and again establishes

the session we even have this going back

to David and Solomon David put Solomon

on the throne at least briefly before he

dies to make sure that the section

succession is established in the way

that he wants it and we'll see there's

several other Co regencies I will not go

into the details of the wise and and how

we know that would be a good place to

delve into Thiel's book but these are

part of establishing the chronology is

understanding that these things are

happening so let's dig in

so here we have kind of a blank timeline

and what we're gonna start with is there

are two eclipses that are noted in

Assyrian record there's actually six

that Thiele refers to but these are

really the critical ones and they're

recorded we know that they occurred in

the the the reign of a particular King

and what you

sometimes even what month and so what

scientists have done is basically create

a model of the solar system and that on

a computer and run that in Reverse so

run it backwards and say okay well when

would we have had an eclipse that was

visible from Nineveh that's you know

when would that have been

and can we line that up with these dates

based on what we understand of who was

raining when and so these two are really

the foundational one 763 and 721 and

from them we can link back to the entire

neo-assyrian period sort of the last

dynasty of Assyria but this is the one

that we're interested in and this

establishes and really locks in a lot of

these dates we know that the Assyrian

Empire ended in 609 we'll talk about

that in a bit but this gives us the

basics now Assyria interacted a ton with

Babylon they basically ran Babylon in a

number of places so you'll see here

there's some overlaps or we're from

tiglath-pileser the 3rd through a Serb

on a pole basically Assyria is running

Babylon and they were actually a number

of earlier times as well where they at

least battle and owed allegiance to

Assyria or was somehow subject to them

so we can lay in the entire Babylonian

timeline right up to the fall of Babylon

in 539 and and the rule of Cyrus we can

also use a Serb on a pole to lock in the

late a Gyptian timeline so I've shown

all of the Kings or most of the kings of

the 25th dynasty the only one we're

really absolutely sure about is to Harco

the last one who who ruled from 690 to

664 because he was defeated by astra

Beneful who sacked phoebs so we have a

hard date where we can line up those two

people in egyptian history and so the

26th dynasty which follows is very solid

timewise after what you see is semitic

the third egypt gets conquered by the

Persians and so we know the Persian

dynasty and then ultimately by the

Greeks and we have the Potala Mayock

dynasty right up to Cleopatra in the end

but so Egyptian history from 690 down is

solid

I'm not going to show you what's before

because there's some dispute and I will

come back to that at the end so if we

have this timeline now we have a couple

of key things there are a couple of

monuments in Assyria one commemorating

the Battle of car car in 853 BC now in

the list of Kings that oppose Shama

nazar the third in that battle we find a

Happ king of Israel so we know Ahab was

alive in 853 there's something else

known as the black obelisk of Shem Elam

shot my knees were the third which dates

to 841 12 years later and that indicates

that Jehu of Israel was paying tribute

so we know that Jay who must have been

alive at that date so those are really

our anchor points if we're gonna start

developing the chronology of Israel and

Judah so we have a hat we have Judah we

know that they were alive in these

respective years that it's 12 years

apart we also know that there were two

kings in between now the total Raynal

years is two for a Isaiah and 12 for

joram or I'm sorry yeah 12 for joram for

a total of fourteen Raynal years but

because we know Israel is using non

ascension year dating we need to take

away to double counted years so a is

ayah and joram reigned for a total of 12

years and we have a gap of 12 years so

the only way to make that work is that

they exactly fit in that gap what that

means is that a hab must have died in

853 was succeeded by a Isaiah and that

Jorah must have died in 841 and was

succeeded by Jehu so now we have a very

solid link here and this is kind of

unique because of that exact fit very

often you get these things and you get

some wiggle room you know work well it

could've been the last year could be the

second or the third you know that kind

of thing but here it's pretty much exact

so we can nail this down and so we can

nail down the reins of Ahab and Jay who

at the same time based on those events

and we can put the their predecessors

and successors onto our timeline as well

now remember tip knee and Omri were

rivals for a period and then Omri was

able to defeat him and reign solely and

he was

father of Ahab the house of Omri and in

fact even after that that dynasty if you

will has been wiped out and the

Assyrians refer to Israel as the house

of Omri so you still see that still

they'll count Jehu and others as part of

that house even though they really

weren't so we've got this now we also

know that in 841 when Jay who killed

joram he also killed a his eye huh and

so we have a link a very hard link to

the end of the psi his life in the

beginning of Atholl ayahs reign and

that's our kind of starting point for

the kings of Judah now you'll see here

on everything that we do in the biblical

timeline things that are mentioned in

the Bible events and people are in dark

blue the Messianic line however is in

purple so cioth Alya was not part of

that line whereas the other Kings were

and so you'll see that purple running

through all of the charts that that we

do we can put in place also joash so we

have a nice chunk of the middle of the

two rains all linked together

particularly at 8:41 with the transition

from joram to Jehu so that's the

beginning this is the anchor point for

our timeline and it's solidly rooted in

Assyrian history in the reign of Shama

days or the third so if we work back

from 841 BC we can go back and add the

rest of the kings of Israel Arab ashen a

dab and Jeroboam the first and that gets

us back to 931 BC now remember we're

taking off one year for each reign

because of that double count but that's

how we get there we can also look at

ASSA at Abijah and at Raya Boehm and

recognizing the co-regency between AUSA

and Jehoshaphat at the very end the last

two years of his reign that also gets us

back to 931 so we can feel very

comfortable then putting Solomon as

ending his reign and we'll say 9:30 so

as you know the United Kingdom broke up

with the coronation of Rehoboam

Jeroboam rebelled and that was the

beginning of the Kingdom of Israel so we

can pretty feel pretty comfortable that

we've

baled down where Solomon is on this

timeline now we should also kind of look

make sure we're counting things right

now in the case of Judah we can just add

up the dates making sure we recognize

the Co regencies although we do have the

last two Kings are in that non ascension

year reckoning which we have to double

count years that means we get ninety two

official years and nine the actual years

on the other side in Israel we end up

with ninety-eight official years and 90

actual years because all of this is

reckoned in that non ascension year

reckoning so where does that leave us

well we've got the basics right now

we've nailed down we know Solomon ruled

for 40 years so we now know he reigned

970 or nine seventy one to nine thirty

nine thirty one that has established

we've got the key events linking to

shaman easier to get the the rest of the

early history but now let's look at the

other events to get us to the late

history we have another Estella a

basically a rock monument that indicates

that joash paid tribute to a Dan a dad

now Rory the third but we don't have a

particular date in his reign we just

know that it happened so those two must

have been alive at the same time we also

know that Menahem paid tribute to pull

now poll as it turns out is a nickname

for tiglath-pileser the third and deal

goes through that in his book at

establishing that but we'll take just

take that for granted that so we have

Menahem paying tribute to him and that

we can't establish and again feel in his

book lays out the details that that was

in 743 next up we know that that in 723

shamah Nizar v conquers samaria after a

three-year siege so we know that's the

end of the reign of the last king of

israel which is hosea and again that's

723 sargon ii the next assyrian king

actually claims that victory he doesn't

come to the throne until two years later

it was common for kings to claim

actually the late accomplishments of

their predecessors

I would also suggest that I don't know I

don't have any data to say that this is

or isn't true but it may be that Sargon

was actually present as a military

leader

even though not King at that event and

so he wanted to take credit for making

it happen once he was actually

established as the King Sargon was

actually shaman easer the fifths brother

they're both the sons a particular

pillow sort of the third and Sargon came

to the throne in a coup over his brother

so definitely wanting to one-up him

would be expected but we had that date

established the next date that we can

establish through a synchronism is in

701 and here we know that Senate cherub

besieged Jerusalem it was in the 14th

year I believe of Hezekiah we know that

to be 701 BC that that actually took

place in the Assyrian annals and not

only is that recorded in the Bible but

it's also recorded in Herodotus in book

2 chapter 141 or section 141 there's

some other events that we can also tie

back to we know that Josiah was slain by

Pharaoh Necho when he met him in battle

and we can tie that to a trip of the

Egyptian King up to face the Babylonians

in 609 so we can tie down the end of

Josiah's reign and then finally we know

that Nebuchadnezzar conquered in

Jerusalem in 586 so those are our key

points that we need to make sure our

history lines up with to be confident

that we've got everything right so now

if we look from 800 down to 700 BC that

first milestone joash doesn't really

help us much because you'll see there's

a huge overlap between those two kings

we don't have anything to specify what

year of reign it was for a dad nur re

the 3rd it's not mentioned in the Bible

so it could be anywhere as you see what

the arrows left and right as to when

that actually happened the next event

Menahem now that one we can tie down

again to 743 so basically the very end

of Mims Reza reigned before he receding

succeeded by Pekka hyah

and then the last event that we have the

destruction of Samaria we know that's

the end of Hosea so if we put all these

pieces together recognizing the

co-regency between Jehoash and Jeroboam

the second and the competing reigns of

Menahem and Pekka we get to exactly 723

BC so all of that works out and we can

be confident that we've got everything

lined up correctly on the to decide

there's sort of not much going on other

than the synchronism is between Israel

and Judah that you see you know as every

king switches in one kingdom or the

other you'll see that you know so-and-so

began to reign and whatever year of the

other king one thing by the way to

remember about that is as those happen

the reckonings are in the system of the

king that is being referred to so if it

says in Israel

king of Israel began to reign in stater

boma second began to reign in this in a

certain year of a messiah of judah

that's based on how israel reckons those

dates and similarly the other way

it's bei if it's a king if a messiah

began to reign in a certain year of

Jehoash that's based on how Judah

reckons those dates and so in the end in

the period we're actually looking at

where they're both reckoning dates using

ascension year then it doesn't matter

but in the earlier period that does

matter and that gets another thing that

can get you off in terms of your years

so the one event that we have here is of

course 14th year of Hezekiah that is 701

BC

and we have Senna sherab preceding

Jerusalem so that's our basic eight

hundred to seven hundred of Israel

there's a couple other things that

happen here the beginning of the way we

would reckon time the Greeks reckon from

the first Olympiad so they would reckon

Olympic cycles every four years and you

could say hey in the 10th Olympiad which

would be 40 40 years in the second year

of that Olympiad which would make it 42

years and that would allow you to date

from 776 BC Rome just reckoned from the

date that Rome was found at 753 BC so

you'd say hey

the 200th year of Rome well that would

be 553 BC and so that that helps us to

get to more exact dating unfortunately

we're not dealing with either Greece or

Rome as we try and establish these dates

we're back to Assyria Babylon and then

Egypt and this doesn't really help us

but it's very useful for chronologist

trying to establish as these King other

kingdoms interact with Greece and Rome

to get those dates right and so the

closer we get to Jesus and as we go from

BC to AD the the tighter those dates get

because we have the absolute dating all

right so let's talk about the last years

of Judah we have there's a passage in

chronicles we know Manasseh was a a bad

king did not follow the Lord and at some

point he is put in Chains and taken away

by the king of Assyria he repents and is

restored to his throne in Judah which i

think is why we don't see a co-regency

starting there we don't know when that

happened but I'm going to propose that

that was 664 BC the reason for that is

in 664 Ashurbanipal came from Assyria

and went down at sacked Thebans in Egypt

he would have had to pass through Judah

both coming and going and so he had a

great opportunity there if he wanted to

throw him an asset in Chains it was sort

of on his way now it could have happened

under esther hayden before or it could

have happened later but to me this is

probably the most likely date but i put

it up there with a question mark because

there's nothing to to tell us that that

was in fact when it happened

so we can continue now with with egypt

and judah again we come to Necco killing

josiah now what's happening here is

there's a major shift taking place in

these late years in the power system in

in Israel in the early years Egypt is

really the major foreign power and that

continues to some extent right up until

this point with with Necco but you'll

see with paying you know Israel paying

tribute to Assyrian Kings that Assyria

ultimately really established themselves

as the the major power in the north

Ahaziah or Isaiah was known from some

inscriptions to be a major factor in an

alliance of Kings that opposed a serious

so that may have been with support from

Egypt or just kind of a bunch of kings

banding together just not wanting to

allow Assyria to get more powerful but

you kind of have a Syria in the north

Egypt probably still showing some

influence in the south and Hereafter

Thebes has sacked you get a new dynasty

on the throne Egypt makes a little bit

of a comeback and so at the same time

now you have to be the rise of Babylon

and what happens is a Syria has been

running Babylon for a while in 620 be

seen a Bhopal a Tsar king of Babylon

rebels against Assyria Babylon becomes

an independent Kingdom in 612 Babylon

with a coalition that included the Medes

so we'll hear about the Medes later they

destroy Nineveh

so Nineveh is the capital city of

Assyria the Assyrian Empire doesn't

quite end there because they still

control another major city which is

Haran same Haran that we hear about in

Genesis with Abraham and his father

Terah but a basically a general name who

takes the the name as a king as a saruba

let the second bullet is a king from

much much much earlier the first he

continues to be king of Assyria for

three years and in 609 he enlists the

help of the Pharaoh now who they had

been in conflict with Egypt now he goes

and enlists the help of Egypt to support

him in a fight against Babylon to try

and retake parts of the Assyrian Empire

and they lose that battle so they're

defeated by nabla pilaster and the

Babylonians that is the end of the

Assyrian Empire in 609 not the end of it

yet Egypt though Pharaoh Necho is still

very powerful as a big army so what we

see is another battle which takes place

in 605 known as the Battle of Carr

commish it's mentioned in Jeremiah 46

this is an interesting one at Apple a

sir is still alive at this point he is

sick though

he stays home in Babylon his son

nebuchadnezzar ii it leads the army to

victory at car kamesh basically breaks

the power of egypt in Palestine or is

the Israel area Palestine Syria Lebanon

that now becomes the Dominion of Babylon

the Egyptians are driven back to Egypt

and it shortly after that battle NABBA

pilaster dies Nebuchadnezzar runs back

to Babylon gets crowned King and then we

have his his actions after that so now

Babylon is the major power so they come

to Jerusalem in 597 and do the first

deportation which starts the first the

first captivity so if we look at the

kings of Judah we had Manasseh my a man

seated by Josiah Josiah is killed by

Pharaoh Necco people put his son Jehovah

has on the throne but Necco on his way

back from the battle deposes Jehovah has

puts his own guy on the throne which is

Joe another son Jehoiakim once

Nebuchadnezzar is able to assert his

power he deposed as Jehovah came I would

have been a friend of Egypt wants to put

his guy on the throne he takes

jehoiachin as their captive and then

we're left with actually he puts this

guy

Zedekiah on the throne and Zedekiah

rules up until he rebels and ultimately

nebuchadnezzar destroys Jerusalem in 586

and that's the end of the Kingdom of

Judah so that's all the late history but

you see it's a big back-and-forth going

on in the larger world between Assyria

Babylon and Egypt and Judah is kind of

caught in the middle of all that so here

is our complete timeline so we have all

the Kings laid out this is what see on

the biblical timeline website in terms

of this period and the key events so I

want to take a minute though and talk

about Egypt there is one very important

synchronism that we didn't talk about

but we'll come back we'll come to that

in a second before we get there briefly

966 then is the foundation of Solomon's

Temple we

find this reference in first Kings 6:1

and the importance of that verse is it

gives the years back to the exodus from

that event so now that we've established

that the fourth year of Solomon's reign

is 966 we now have a date for the exodus

and from that we can work our way back

to earlier dates in fact all the way to

creation so that's why this is so

critical this really becomes the anchor

point for all earlier chronology and now

I want to talk about Egypt so we didn't

talk about Shishak so we know from the

Bible that in the fifth year of Ray

Obama which will put his 925 shishak

Pharaoh of Egypt comes and carries away

all the Temple treasures first point I

want to make on this is that we don't

need this synchronism to set up the

calendar for Judah and Israel it you saw

we did the whole thing without even

bringing this up it does not rely on

that the fact is actually that Egyptian

chronology relies on this synchronism

but not the Hebrew chronology so there

are two different chronologies that that

use this the first is what I'll call the

Orthodox chronology this is what most

Egyptologists would accept in the 1820s

shampo Leon one of the deciphers of

hieroglyphics took his one and only trip

to Egypt to prove that he could actually

read the hieroglyphs and he found in a

temple an inscription from the pharaoh

shishak the first talking about a

campaign in israel now the interesting

thing is that campaign doesn't in every

Egyptian campaign it will actually list

all the cities that they conquered and

none of the cities of Judah and

certainly not and certainly Jerusalem

are listed as places that he conquered

so but because of the similarity

phonetically between Shashank and

shishak shampo lien said AHA this is the

guy this is this is Shishak from the

Bible and for the last 200 years that

has been the Orthodox chronology all

built off of that synchronism

shoe Shack is in what we call the third

intermediate period of Egypt it's a

period where there was lots of confusion

and there's a lot of questions about the

actual chronology and that's why we

can't just you know stack dates back

from 664 the other date that we had it's

kind of a lot of you know competing

pharaohs and the north and the south and

other things going on a lot of scholarly

debate on exactly what the right system

is to date that and so this has been

used as the basis for dating everything

in Egypt before this is this particular

synchronism recently starting in the mid

1990s a guy named David Rahl proposed a

new chronology where he has Ramses the

second the most famous Pharaoh in

Egyptian history actually the one that

you see in the Ten Commandments and

movies like that as the Pharaoh as

Shishak now obviously phonetically

ramasees is very different from Shishak

but Rahl is able to show that ramasees

actually had a nickname which is more

like Shi and how that could have

been corrupted into Shishak by later

editors and so he makes a case that that

this is ramasees but this is far from

the accepted view I put it out here

because it's it's a question that I get

some time I don't have a complete new

chronology at this point I'm sure

something I'm trying to kind of put

together from various references to fill

in all the gaps but he would put

ramasees there and then that means that

Akhenaten The Heretic Pharaoh and also

the Pharaoh that's mentioned in the

Amarna letters would line up with Saul

and ich spreche F so and and Rahl would

actually equate Saul with a person from

the Amarna letters called Libya who was

a chieftain in Israel and the high end

the highlands of Ephraim at that time

lines up in a lot of ways very well with

with Saul and then he's killed in battle

his son would Baal which is a

translation of issue chef basically the

same name but translated into Akkadian

sends a couple of letters to the Pharaoh

at the end so that could be but it

doesn't fit the traditional chronology

and there's a lot of work and

discussions still to be done

you know a lot of prominent each

Egyptologists would call the new

chronology rubbish but there is a lot of

evidence to support at least some of the

assertions that Rahl makes there so I

wanted to put it out there but the key

thing again to remember is that we don't

need this synchronism to nail down the

dates of the Hebrew Kings it can all be

done from the assyrian and later

egyptian and babylonian synchronism so

we can still be confident regardless of

who she Shack is that we have the right

dates for Solomon okay well that's it

thanks for watching and stay tuned there

will be more of these as I have time to

put them together

NEXT

Discussion of 41 Keys that decode the Exodus Route:

1.       The entire exodus was a miracle:

a.       Scripture says that Israel miraculously travelled day and night and therefore walked far greater daily distances than under normal human conditions: Ex 13:22; Neh 9:12; Num 14:14; Ps 105:39; Ps 78:14. The average human walking speed is 5 km per hour. Daily travel rates from Goshen to the Straits of Tiran were 29 km for each of the 17 travel days and 18 km for each of the 11 travel days from the Red Sea and Mt. Sinai. Without any miraculous assistance, 3 million Hebrews walking 5 km/h could easily travel 30 km in only 6 hours. That is 3 hours of walking in the morning and a 2-hour rest then 3 hours of walking in the afternoon.

b.      God provided supernatural assistance while Israel walked long distances for long periods of time so that they did not get sore feet or sore muscles:  Deut 8:4; Neh 9:21

c.       God provided supernatural help while crossing the Red Sea so that nobody (young or old) tripped or stumbled: Isaiah 63:11-14; Ps 105:37

d.      Their clothing and shoes did not tear, break or wear out for 40 years: Deut 29:5

e.      God provided rain for water when needed in addition to the split rock at Mt. Horeb and Kadesh Barnea: Psalm 68:7-9; 105:41

f.        God provided food for both man and beast: Israel took their flocks and herds with them. In addition to the 3 million Hebrews, were hundreds of thousands of flocks of sheep and herds of cattle: Exodus 10:9,26; 12:38; 34:3; Num 20:19. Both men and animal needed food. "And in their heart they put God to the test by asking food according to their desire. Then they spoke against God; They said, “Can God prepare a table in the wilderness? “Behold, He struck the rock so that waters gushed out, and streams were overflowing; Can He give bread also? Will He provide meat for His people?” (Psalm 78:18–20) When Israel complained about food, God rained quail on the ground 44 inches deep. God miraculously provided food for both man and animal. God provided quail and manna for food (Psalm 105:40).

g.       The cloud by day protected them from direct sunlight and acted as a rain umbrella: Psalm 105:39; Isaiah 4:4-6

h.      The cloud was continuous assurance of the presence of God to give them peace: Ex 13:22

2.       Exodus calendar: The 47-day journey from Goshen to Mt. Sinai: Ex 19:1

a.       Israel left Egypt on the 15th day of the first month (Num 33:3), arrived at the Red sea on day 17, waited 8 days for Pharaoh to arrive, crossed the Red Sea on day 25, entered the Wilderness of Sin on day 31 (Ex16:1), spent 8 days in the Wilderness of Sin in order to learn the Sabbath Manna cycle then arrived at Mt Sinai on day 47 which was the 1st day of the third month (Ex 19:1).

b.      Goshen to Sinai took 47 days not 60 days: Ex 19:1. Moses spotlights God’s divine providence behind the exodus journey by noting the precise timing of Israel leaving Goshen on a full moon and arriving at Mt. Sinai on a full moon.

c.       A 47-day journey is foundational to the prophetic messianic synchronism of both the Law of Moses in 1446 BC and the Law of Christ in AD 33 being revealed on the day of Pentecost fulfilling Isa 2:1-4 and Acts 2:1. In three different places Augustine not only calculated a 47 day journey, he highlighted the messianic prophetic synchronism that both Old and New laws were given on Pentecost. (Augustine Against Faustus 32.12; Januarius Letter 55; Sermon 272B) Just as there was fire on the summit of Mt. Sinai when the Law of Moses was given on Pentecost, so too there were “tongues of fire” on the heads of the twelve apostles on Pentecost when the Law of Christ was given. “The appearance of the glory of the Lord was like a consuming fire on the mountain top." (Exodus 24:17)

d.      Moses received the Law during his 3rd ascension on the summit of Mt. Sinai: Ex 19:16-25; 20:1-26; Heb 12:18-29 but Fritz has this event occurring after the day of Pentecost. Scripture and ancient sources show that the Law of Moses and the Law of Christ were both given on the day of Pentecost: Isa 2:2-5; Acts 2:1-4. Fritz dismisses this critical messianic prophetic connection between both Old and New Testament Laws being revealed on Pentecost. Fritz comments, “The biblical timing of Pentecost 50 days after Passover is not being disputed here. What is disputable is the late rabbinic tradition that Pentecost also commemorated "the giving of the law” (Exodus Mysteries, Glen Fritz, p450, 2019 AD). Fritz paints a false portrait that the earliest Jewish literary sources support his 61-day journey with no connection with Moses receiving the Law on Pentecost. He sweeps away any association of the Law being revealed on Pentecost as a “late rabbinic tradition”. This is a shocking and unscholarly misrepresentation of the earliest Jewish literary sources because the opposite is true. There is unanimous agreement of all Jewish and Christian literary sources from the earliest in 170 BC down to AD 500 that the journey from Goshen to Sinai was 47 days and the Law of Moses was given on the day of Pentecost.

e.      Both the Babylonian Talmud (Pesahim 68A) and the Midrash (Tanḥuma C) state that Moses received the Torah on Pentecost which proves a 47-day journey. Seder Olam Rabbah which dates to AD 160 specifically says that the law was given on Sivan 6 which is day 52, a perfect fit for a 47-day journey. (SO 5:31) Finally, the Book of Jubilees which dates to 170 years before Christ says in the opening verse that Moses received the two stone tablets of the Ten Commandments on Sivan 16 or day 62 after leaving Goshen. This corresponds to Moses’ 6th ascension up Mt. Sinai when he spent 40 days (Ex 24:12-18). All this proves the exodus route from Goshen to Sinai was 47 days. This has devastating consequences for advocates of the Nuweiba Beach Red Sea crossing and specifically Glen Fritz who cannot make Mt. Sinai earlier than day 64 because his route is 888 km long.

3.      God was in total control of the travel itinerary of the exodus route:

a.       God chose the route, not Moses: Ex 13:21; Neh 9:12; Num 14:14,19; Ps 78:14

b.      Moses did not know he was heading to Mt. Sinai when he left Goshen and he was not choosing the route of travel. This is important because many suggest Moses headed directly towards Elat as though he knew the final destination was the Midian area.

c.       The shortest route to Midian from Egypt is crossing the Straits of Tiran. When Moses fled Pharaoh, he may have crossed the Red Sea by hiring a boat to reach Jethro at Midian on the far shore. Glen Fritz makes the false assumption that Moses fled from Pharaoh to Midian by passing through Elat then south.

d.      Even if the Straits of Tiran was the route Moses took to flee Pharaoh, Moses still had no idea where he was going. Moses would not have assumed in advance that God would part the Red Sea in order to reach Mt. Sinai. Once across, Moses might also have wrongly assumed he was heading for Midian to visit Jethro.

4.      Southern route not west or north: Ex 13:17-18

a.       The route from Goshen to the Red Sea did not head north or west towards the coastal route to Philistia, but south to the Red Sea: Ex 13:17-18.

b.      Any Red Sea crossing site that heads north from Goshen directly contradicts Ex 13:17-18 and must be rejected. These rejected sites include Menzaleh/Tanis Lake (Carl Drews) and Sirbonis Lake.

c.       The Glen Fritz Nuweiba route to Elat is the same basic westerly direction for the first 75 km as the forbidden “way of the Philistines” except it runs a bit southerly.

5.      The “way of the Red Sea” is the road beside the Gulf of Suez to Tiran: Exodus 13:18

a.       The Tiran route travels the same “way to the Red Sea” road as the traditional route to Mt. Musa. The Tiran and traditional routes follow the identical path for the first 280 km from Goshen. While appealing to the consensus view that the way to the Red Sea lead to the Gulf of Suez, is no assurance of being right, dismissing the consensus view, needs to be based upon a solid reason. There are no known ancient literary sources that call the road from Egypt to Elat the “road to the Red Sea”.

b.      Both the Gulf of Aqaba and Suez are called the Red Sea in scripture. There were numerous roads called the “way to the Red Sea” in the Bible, depending on your starting destination. Roadways were named after their final destination and geography.

i.      In 2080 BC, the “way to Shur” was the road Hagar took from Hebron, south towards Ezion Geber (Elat) that ultimately led do Midian (Gen 16:7). Then in 2066 BC, Hagar fled from Gerar to the Wilderness of Beersheba heading towards Shur (Gen 21:21).

ii.      In 1446 BC, the way of the Philistines, was the coastal trade route from Tel el-Dab’a up the coastline of Canaan to where the Philistines lived. This was known also as the “way of Horus”. Exodus 13:17

iii.      In 1446 BC, the “way to the Red Sea” was the coastal road from Egypt that led to the Gulf of Suez and then hugged the eastern banks to Tiran: Exodus 13:18

iv.      In 1444 BC, the “way to the Red Sea” was the road in the Arabah valley from Kadesh Barnea at Petra towards Ezion Geber (Elat): Numbers 14:25

v.      In 1407 BC, the “way to the Red Sea” was the road in the Arabah valley from Kadesh Barnea at Petra towards Ezion Geber (Elat): Numbers 21:4; Deut 1:40; 2:1.

c.       The most logical route for the “way to the Red Sea” is due south towards the Gulf of Suez. God had forbidden Moses to go due west on the “way of the Philistines”.

d.      The Nuweiba route travels the road that leads to the Gulf of Aqaba and Ezion Geber which runs south west.

6.      Gulf of Aqaba is “yam suph” (Red Sea): Studying the meaning of “yam suph” (Red Sea, sea of reeds) is irrelevant since the Gulf of Aqaba is called the “Red Sea” in five different scriptures: Ex 23:31; Num 21:4; Deut 2:1; Judges 11:16; 1 Kings 9:26. The second Red Sea camp after Elim was on the Arabian Gulf which was called “the red Sea” (yam suph, Numbers 33:10). A huge amount of time and energy has been wasted by engaging in almost endless etymological gymnastics in defining the meaning of YAM SUPH. The Gulf of Suez, Gulf of Aqaba and the Arabian Gulfs are all called the “YAM SUPH”. Those who say the Greek Septuagint mistranslated “yam suph” as Red Sea are at variance with the 70 translators who were the top Hebrew scholars from Jerusalem in the world in 282 BC. The Greek Septuagint was the standard synagogue “pulpit Bible” and only Old Testament used by the first century church. Those who say the common Hebrew word for the colour red used in the book of Exodus is a different word than “suph” in “yam suph”, are in a dogfight with the Holy Spirit who twice used the ordinary word for the colour “red” in the Greek New Testament in “Red Sea” (Acts 7:36; Heb 11:29). Let us forever ban “sea of reeds” from our vernacular in discussing the Exodus route unless one begins by demonstrating that scripture calls all three saltwater ocean gulfs the Sea of Reeds.

7.      The Red Sea crossing was deep enough to clearly be a massive divine miracle: At the Straits of Tiran the walls of water were up to 300 meters on both sides. The Red Sea crossing was a miraculous demonstration of God’s divine power: Exodus 13:3; Deut 26:8; 7:8. Shallow freshwater “sea of reeds” lakes are wrong because they minimize the miraculous through naturalistic explanations. These rejected Red Sea crossing sites include Menzaleh or Tanis Lake (Carl Drews), Sirbonis Lake and Elat (Sir Colin Humphries). These must be rejected out of hand because they deny the miraculous. In 5554 BC when God created the world in 6 literal 24-hour days, he was taking his time. Scripture indicates it is very deep water like the Gulf of Aqaba, not shallow water a few meters deep:

a.       “The deeps cover them; They went down into the depths like a stone." (Exodus 15:5)

b.      “At the blast of Your nostrils the waters were piled up, The flowing waters stood up like a heap; The deeps were congealed in the heart of the sea." (Exodus 15:8)

c.       “You blew with Your wind, the sea covered them; They sank like lead in the mighty waters." (Exodus 15:10)

d.      “You divided the sea before them, So they passed through the midst of the sea on dry ground; And their pursuers You hurled into the depths, Like a stone into raging waters." (Nehemiah 9:11)

e.      "The waters saw You, O God; The waters saw You, they were in anguish; The deeps also trembled." (Psalm 77:16)

f.        "Your way was in the sea And Your paths in the mighty waters, And Your footprints may not be known." (Psalm 77:19)

g.       "Thus He rebuked the Red Sea and it dried up, And He led them through the deeps, as through the wilderness." (Psalm 106:9)

h.      "Thus says the Lord, Who makes a way through the sea And a path through the mighty waters," (Isaiah 43:16)

i.         "Was it not You who dried up the sea, The waters of the great deep; Who made the depths of the sea a pathway For the redeemed to cross over?" (Isaiah 51:10)

j.        "Who led them through the depths? Like the horse in the wilderness, they did not stumble; As the cattle which go down into the valley." (Isaiah 63:13)

8.      Three million Hebrews: The exodus population was 3.5 million not 5730 or 12,000 or 35,000. The Hebrew word “eleph” can only mean the number 1000 in the population census passages. The popular etymological fiction that “eleph” means “clans” in the population census trashes the inspiration of scripture and is refuted by Numbers 3:39–51, Exodus 38:24-29 and 1 Corinthians 10:8. 

9.      Thutmoses III was the Pharaoh of the Exodus:

a.       The Exodus was about God humbling the proud and powerful. The Pharaoh of the Exodus had to be one of the greatest and most powerful Pharaoh’s who ever lived: Ex 9:16. Thutmoses III was the Pharaoh of the Exodus because he was one of the greatest in Egyptian history whereas his son Amenhotep II, was small, weak, insignificant and unaccomplished in contrast. Both Thutmoses III and Herod the Great stand out in history as megalomaniac builders.

b.      Death of Pharaoh’s firstborn son: Thutmoses III was the Pharaoh of the Exodus and his eldest son Amenemhat died in the 10th plague. Amenhotep II was not the firstborn son of Thutmose III who succeeded his father in 1431 BC.

c.       Pharaoh did not drown in the Red Sea: The Pharaoh of the Exodus did not die in the Red Sea, but the army sank into very deep water: Exodus 15:4-5,10; Ps 136:15

10.  Gulf of Aqaba missing from “Dark Ages” maps: The Dark Ages that lasted for over 1000 years was triggered by the Muslim conquest in 642 BC. During this “dark” 1000 years of information loss, Bible cartographers were unaware of the existence of the Gulf of Aqaba. This omission created defective Bible maps which prevented Bible students from considering a Red Sea crossing at the Straits of Tiran on the Gulf of Aqaba. All historic maps produced during the dark ages down to about AD 1750 chose Red Sea crossing locations near Egypt, and Mt. Musa was the only choice for Mt. Sinai. The “enlightenment” restored the Gulf of Aqaba to Bible maps. Bible students today do not suffer from this historic handicap of the missing Gulf of Aqaba and are now free to consider Mt. Sinai in Saudi Arabia.

11.  Ballah and Timsah lakes were inside Goshen and cannot be the Red Sea crossing sites:
  

a.       Ballah lake and Timsah lake cannot be the Red Sea crossing site because they are inside the land Goshen. These two freshwater lakes would be an important water supply for the 3 million Hebrews who would occupy the entire area from Tel el-Dab’a to the Suez Canal. The lakes were a major food supply of fish for the Hebrew like the Sea of Galilee at the time of Jesus. It is likely therefore, that the entire shoreline was surrounded and occupied by Hebrews. While Ballah lake and Timsah lake are 40 km east of Tel el-Dab’a, both lakes were entirely inside the land of Goshen. Even the Bitter lakes would be used regularly by the Hebrews as a commercial fishing center being only 15 km south of the land of Goshen.

b.      Lake Goshen in the Wadi Tumilat, the city of Goshen (Heroonpolis = Tell el-Maskhuta) and Pithom (Tell el-Retaba) were all inside the land of Goshen. The Septuagint changes Goshen in the Masoretic text to Heroonpolis in Genesis 46:28-29. In 282 BC the top Jewish scholars translated the Hebrew into Greek in Alexandria and centered Goshen at the Wadi Tumilat. The City of Pithom is Tell el-Retaba: located at in the Wadi Tumilat at the eastern shore of lake Goshen.

c.       This has devastating consequences for those who propose a Red Sea crossing at either the Ballah lake or Timsah lake. Imagine the entire lake is surround by Hebrew tents and suddenly Moses brings them to the western shore and parts the sea. On the other side, several of the Hebrews likely ran inside their houses to grab a few more things for the trip to Mt. Sinai! It is also impossible for the Hebrews to be trapped at any of these freshwater lakes.

d.      If Goshen extended to the Suez Canal, then there was no wilderness for Israel to travel through before reaching the Red Sea at Ballah or Timsah Lake.

e.      Pithom and Heroonpolis was only 15 km and 7 km respectively from lake Timsah which several propose as the “Sea of Reeds” Moses crossed. This is too close to be a three days journey outside the land of Goshen. Many look at the 40 km Rameses is from lake Timsah and feel this is a good distance for a three day journey through the wilderness. Since Rameses was the western portion of Goshen and the Wadi Tumilat was the center of Goshen, it makes the Red Sea crossings at either Ballah lake or Timsah lakes impossible because they were part of Goshen.

12.  Long journey through the wilderness before reaching the Red Sea: Israel went through a wilderness to get to the Red Sea. The Hebrew occupation in Wadi Tumilat which included Goshen Lake, Pithom at Tell el-Retaba, and Heroonpolis at Tell el-Maskhuta is less than 10 km from the western shores of lake Timsah. This means there was not three days of travel through the wilderness for Israel before reaching the Red Sea at Ballah or Timsah Lake. The Red Sea is located at the distant edge of the wilderness, far from Goshen, not the beginning edge of a wilderness near Goshen: Ex 13:18-20; Num 33:6; Judges 11:16. Philo said around AD 50: “having accomplished together a long and desolate journey through the wilderness, destitute of any beaten road, at last arrived at the sea which is called the Red Sea.” (Philo, On the Life of Moses 2:247) We can prove this because Moses travelled through a wilderness to reach “Etham on the edge of the wilderness”. Those who advocate Red Sea crossing locations that are close to Egypt, ignore that Etham and the Red Sea crossing are on the distant edge of the Sinai peninsula wilderness as opposed to the beginning edge of the Sinai peninsula wilderness near the Suez canal. Only Gulf of Aqaba candidate sites correctly have Israel travelling through a large wilderness, at the distant end of which is Etham and the Red Sea crossing. The Red Sea must be far enough away from Goshen to prevent the Hebrews from simply walking home in a day. They must also be far enough from Goshen to justify their bitter complaints about being in the wilderness: Exodus 14:11-12. The Bitter Lakes were so close to Goshen (15 km), they were likely a popular vacation and weekend fishing resort for the Hebrews when they got time off from brick making.


13.  Etham and the Red Sea were further than 3 days from Goshen:

a.       The Red Sea crossing had to be at least 3 days from Goshen proving a crossing on the Gulf of Aqaba is the only possibility: Exodus 5:3. There were three stops between Goshen and the Red Sea which means it is a minimum of a three day journey. Lake Ballah and Timsah were in Goshen. The Bitter Lakes were 15 km from Goshen and the Port of Suez contradict Exodus 5:3 because they are much less than three days away from Tel el-Dab’a. The three days of Ex 5:3 and the three stops between Goshen and the Red Sea do not give us any useful information about how far the Red Sea crossing or Mt. Sinai are because we know they crossed the Red Sea on Day 25 (Ex 16:1) and the total trip to Sinai was 47 days (Ex 19:1).

b.      After Israel crossed the Red Sea it must be geographically isolated from Egypt in order to prevent Pharaoh’s army easily perusing Israel a second time. This geographic separate from Egypt after crossing should trigger Israel to rejoice and continued their trip to Mt. Sinai in peace without any chance of further threat. All near-Egypt crossing sites are too close to Egypt to be out of danger after crossing. Israel would not have rejoiced after crossing the Red Sea at the Bitter or Timsah Lakes, they would keep running in fear! The north Gulf of Suez crossing exits directly beside the major seaport and Egyptian army base. The Tiran crossing is a perfect fit being separated by 16 kms of ocean and at least a 30-day journey for the Egyptian army to reach them by travelling over the north tip of the Gulf of Aqaba and down to the Wilderness of Shur.

c.       The Nuweiba route contradicts the Bible because Etham is not on the edge of anything and does not fit being located “at the edge of the Wilderness”. Fritz’s Etham is in the middle of the Sinai Peninsula, at no place of any significance, 27 km from the Gulf of Aqaba and Elat. In an odd coincidence, Fritz locates Etham at Mt. Khashm et-Tarif, which is Bryant Wood’s misplaced location for Mt. Sinai. Fritz has Moses march right by Khashm et-Tarif, then make a right turn towards the Nuweiba beach.

d.      The location of Etham in the Tiran route is a perfect fit being on the distant edge of the Wilderness one stop from the final Red Sea camp while Israel unknowingly waited for Pharaoh to arrive.

14.  The Etham Dead End and Backtrack: Ex 14:2-3. Israel passed by the Red Sea camp to Etham and hit a dead end then backtracked, retracing their steps to the final Red Sea camp where they waited for Pharaoh. The Tiran crossing is a perfect fit. The Hebrew word used for “turn back” is the same one used when the waters of the Red Sea “returned” and drowned the Egyptians. It is also the common word for “repentance” in Isaiah. The Nuweiba route fails because at Etham it merely changes course by making a right-hand turn to reach the Gulf of Aqaba at the Nuweiba beach four days away.


a.       The Hebrew word for “turn back” is “šûb” in Ex 14:2 and Num 33:7 “Tell the sons of Israel to turn back [šûb] and camp before Pi-hahiroth”

b.      “šûb” is the primary verb for “turn back”, “return” and “Repent”.

c.       It was used when the “waters returned to its normal state and covered the Egyptians” Ex 14:27-28

d.      “šûb” is the word behind repent in Isa 6:10, which is quoted by Jesus in Matthew 13:15. “Render the hearts of this people insensitive, Their ears dull, And their eyes dim, Otherwise they might see with their eyes, Hear with their ears, Understand with their hearts, And return [šûb] and be healed.” (Isaiah 6:10) The meaning of repent/backtrack/turn back in salvation is that sinners are walking towards Satan and they are to turn back 180 degrees and start walking the opposite direction to God.

15.  The dead end and was at Etham, not the final Red Sea camp: Moses came to the Straits of Tiran and unknowingly passed directly over the final Red Sea camp and continued another 24 km to the dead end at Etham where the mountains come down to the sea. It was at the dead end that God told Moses to turn back and travel 24 km back to where he has passed the day before and camp waiting for Pharaoh to arrive. God was using the Hebrews as bait when they backtracked from the dead end at Etham. Advocates of the Nuweiba crossing have no dead end or backtrack at Etham but they do have a dead end at the Nuweiba beach. A careful reading of the Bible text shows that the dead end was specifically at Etham and the final Red Sea camp was a reverse course to a previous point they had been the day before.

16.  Trapped at the Red Sea: Israel knew they were trapped because they had gone as far as they could to Etham, then were forced to return because of the mountains that steeply drop to the shoreline. Only at the Straits of Tiran was Israel trapped with no escape when they camped before crossing the Red Sea: Ex 14:2-3. Their only escape was back up the eastern shore of the Gulf of Suez towards Egypt. Every other proposed Red Sea crossing location, including Nuweiba cannot trap the Hebrews at the Red Sea. The Egyptians would not cross through the Bitter lakes, they would simply march two hours to the other side and wait in lawn chairs with a cold drink for the Hebrews to exit the “sea of reeds”. It is impossible to be trapped at the Nuweiba beach because there are at least 5 escape routes. Professional cartographer William Schlegel, in his Satellite Bible Atlas (AD 2013), used the Nuweiba beach as a transit walk-through between traditional Mt. Sinai (Mt. Musa) to Ezion Geber. Schlegel, who lived in Israel for many years, saw the western coastline north of Nuweiba as an easy route between Mt. Musa to Elat. As Pharaoh’s army approached Nuweiba the Egyptians would need to split up into several groups to block these exit routes to trap Israel. Scripture speaks of a single angel blocking the Egyptian army and the Nuweiba beach would require up to 5 angels to block all the escape routes. Josephus is generally of little help regarding the exodus route. His numbers for the size of the Egyptian army are reasonable.

a.       “Another reason for this was that God had commanded him to bring the people to Mount Sinai, that there they might offer him sacrifices. Now when the Egyptians had overtaken the Hebrews, they prepared to fight them, and by their multitude they drove them into a narrow place; for the number that pursued after them was six hundred chariots, with fifty thousand horsemen, and two hundred thousand footmen, all armed. They also seized on the passages by which they imagined the Hebrews might fly, shutting them up between inaccessible precipices and the sea; for there was [on each side] a [ridge of] mountains that terminated at the sea, which were impassable by reason of their roughness, and obstructed their flight; wherefore they were pressed upon the Hebrews with their army, where [the ridges of] the mountains were closed with the sea; which army they placed at the chops of the mountains, that so they might deprive them of any passage into the plain.” (Josephus Antiquities 2.324, 70 AD)

b.      Note: The translators added the words in brackets [on each side] and are not what Josephus said.

c.       Taken at face value, Josephus’ description of mountains trapping Israel at the Red Sea is a perfect fit for Tiran and contradicts all near Egypt crossing points like the Bitter lakes etc. because there are no mountains to trap anyone in the Nile Delta area within 100 km. The North Suez crossing has mountains but there is no way to be trapped against the sea.

d.      Josephus says the Egyptian army split up and blocked all the escape passages through the mountain canyons. There are several problems with Josephus here. First, with his usually vague descriptions such a detailed specific is questionable. Josephus never says where the Red Sea crossing or Mt. Sinai are geographically located, not even a hint. For him to be this specific regarding the Egyptian army blocking escape canyons begs credibility. Second, if the army split up then God would need more than one protection angel to guard their approach. Third, several of the canyon escape routes at Nuweiba are only accessible from geographically remote areas. If Josephus is describing Nuweiba, Pharaoh would need to send troops from the south and north, in addition to blockading several canyon escapes routes. This is quite different from the Bible record that a single army approaches and is held at bay by a single angel, and the topography of the Straits of Tiran is a perfect fit.

17.  Moses crossed the Red Sea on day 25 from Goshen: (Iyar 9)

a.       Israel travelled three days in the Wilderness of Shur (days 26-28) and arrived at Marah. They travelled one day and arrived at Elim on day 29. They travelled another day and arrived at 2nd Red Sea camp on day 30. Finally, on 6th day after crossing the Red Sea, the entire 3 million Hebrews arrived at the Wilderness of Sin on day 31 which was Iyar 15 (Ex 16:1). Scripture tells us they travelled “3 days” from the Red Sea to Marah and that Moses arrived on day 31 at the Wilderness of Sin with only two stops between.

b.      This is a total of six travel days after crossing the Red Sea to reach the Wilderness of Sin on day 31 from Goshen.

c.       Counting six travel days back from day 31 (Iyar 15) we can be certain the Red Sea crossing was on day 25 (Iyar 9).

d.      A Red Sea crossing at the Straits of Tiran on day 25 is a perfect fit for the timing and topography. No other location is a perfect fit for a day 25 Red Sea crossing.

20.  Marah is the closest Israel will come to Jethro at Midian (Al Bad):

a.       The first time Jethro joins Moses was at Rephidim, which was one stop before arriving at Mt. Sinai.

b.      Glen Fritz has Israel cross the Red Sea at Nuweiba then camp at Al Bad (Midian) as his Elim for three days.

c.       If the actual exodus route passed directly through Midian, the hometown of Moses and Jethro, there would have been some notation by Moses.

d.      Most obvious is that if Israel camped up to three days at Midian, Moses would not have called the location Elim! He would have called it Midian in the Numbers 33 itinerary list.

21.  Second Red Sea Camp: Five days after crossing the Red Sea, Israel camped at the Red Sea a second time while on route to Mt Sinai. Only a Red Sea crossing at the Straits of Tiran provide a sensible, logical, and workable second Red Sea camp on day 5 after crossing the Red Sea, and day 30 from Goshen. This is one day before Israel reached the Wilderness of Sin on day 31 from leaving Goshen (Ex 16:1).


a.       Glen Fritz’s Nuweiba southern route: A Nuweiba Red Sea crossing that takes a southern route around the mountain range to Mt. Lawz must immediately travel inland due east, then south to El Bad, then west, back to the Gulf of Aqaba for the second Red Sea camp. Then the route backtracks by retracing the route east to El Bad, then south to enter the Wilderness of Sin. This is time consuming, illogical, unworkable, and bizarre. Fritz also cannot afford the two extra days to reach the Wilderness of Sin by day 31, so he splits the Hebrews into two travel groups. The Main group bypasses the 2nd Red Sea camp altogether and heads strait to the Wilderness of Sin from Elim. The second travel group navigates one day from Elim through 32 km of canyons to reach the 2nd Red Sea camp at Maqnah then backtracks another day through the same 32 km of canyons back to Elim. Then they travel one day to the Wilderness of Sin arriving two days after the first group. The Nuweiba and Tiran routes intersect and merge at Fritz’s location for the Wilderness of Sin south of Al Bad and the Tiran location for Marah. FAIL

b.      Nate Loper’s Nuweiba northern route: Nate Loper’s Nuweiba Red Sea crossing takes a northern coastal route around the mountain range to Mt. Lawz. After crossing at Nuweiba, he has Israel camp two nights in a row on the Red Sea then turns east to reach Mariah on the third day. Elim is the next stop after Mariah and it is impossible to facilitate a second Red Sea camp after Elim and before the Wilderness of Sin, as the Bible requires in Num 33:10. Nate Loper like many, ignores the second Red Sea camp altogether to make his route work. FAIL The alternate northern interior route follows the same track as Glen Fritz’s southern route except once in the interior, it turns north at the same spot Fritz’s route turns south to Al Bad. The problem with the northern interior route is that it requires travelling 15 miles inland through narrow canyons only to head 15 miles back to the Red Sea through narrow canyons, coming out 20 miles north of where they crossed over from Nuweiba. While this satisfies Num 33:10 to provide a second Red Sea camp, it becomes unworkable because it makes no sense to go 30 miles inland through canyons, only to come out to the same place you could have simply marched due north over much easier terrain after crossing the Red Sea. FAIL While both the northern interior of Loper, and the southern interior route of Fritz do have a second Red Sea Camp, both require illogical tracks to reach the sea. The northern interior route of Loper is actually superior to the southern interior route of Fritz because everybody passes through Elim, the second Red Sea camp to the Wilderness of Sin in one large group sequentially, whereas Fritz’s route must break the Hebrews into two travel groups, two days apart. FAIL The Tiran route is a perfect fit in all aspects.


c.       Ron Wyatt Nuweiba route: Unicorn Internet Archaeologists like Ron Wyatt, Larry Williams, Bob Cornuke, David Fasold, Howard Blum, Larry Williams, Lennart Möller, Jim Caldwell, Penny Caldwell and Ryan Mauro rarely produce any exodus route maps. The two examples below are commonly recycled all over the internet. Their “comic book” looking maps both visit the “Split Rock” of Rephidim, the last stop before reaching Mt. Sinai, which means Israel travelled 70 km to reach Rephidim in 21 days, then another 110 km to reach Mt. Sinai in 1 day. FAIL One map traverses directly over the summit of high mountains between Rephidim and Mt. Sinai to reach Sinai in 1 day. Neither map has a second Red Sea camp. FAIL


22.  Elim, the Wilderness of Sin and Mt. Sinai must be in a direct line-of-sight sequence: Ex 16:1


a.       If you are on the ground standing at Elim and look towards Mt. Sinai, the Wilderness of Sin is between them. There is a linear and sequential geographic order in a line of site with Elim, Wilderness of Sin, Mt. Sinai.

b.      Elim as a major oasis at Ain Ounah, was a significant and known location because it was used as a reference marker to locate "the Wilderness of Sin which is between Elim and Sinai". Ex 16:1

c.       This sequential order is an important marker most people ignore in the Exodus Route by positioning Elim closer to Mt. Sinai than the Wilderness of Sin.

d.      This marker also shows that for the first time since crossing the Red Sea, Israel was walking directly towards Mt. Sinai.

e.      This is a perfect fit for the Tiran crossing because at Elim, Israel makes a 90 degree turn left and begins, for the first time, to make the final approach to Mt. Sinai which is directly ahead in line of site.

f.        The Nuweiba route of Glen Fritz has the order backward because his Elim (located at Al Bad) is between the Wilderness of Sin and Mt. Sinai. His line-of-site sequential order is Wilderness of Sin, Elim, Mt. Sinai and this directly contradicts Exodus 16:1 which says, “the Wilderness of Sin, which is between Elim and Sinai”. This is a serious problem of which he was unaware or failed to address and represents a dissonance between his Nuweiba route and scripture.

23.  After crossing the Red Sea, the first major directional change in course was at Elim:

a.       “The Wilderness of Sin is between Elim and Sinai” (Ex 16:1).

b.      From the Red Sea to Elim, Israel was travelling east. After Elim Israel was travelling north. The route turned 90 degrees left at Elim.

c.       The sequential marker (Elim, Sin, Sinai) must indicate a change in course at Elim because if “between” merely means the next stop on the itinerary, then the Wilderness of Sin is also “between” Mt. Sinai and Marah. In the Biblical itinerary, the Wilderness of Sin was “between” both Marah and Elim, yet Moses excluded Marah because there was no direct line-of-sight between Marah, Wilderness of Sin and Mt. Sinai.

d.      The special notation that the Wilderness of Sin is between Elim and Mt. Sinai proves this is a geographic vector sequence and not merely an itinerary sequence.

e.      The inescapable conclusion is that the reason Moses takes special care to note that the Wilderness of Sin was between Elim and Sinai, is because Israel made a 90 degree left turn at Elim and for the first time, was heading towards Mt. Sinai in line of sight.

24.  Elim and the 2nd Red Sea camp were close to each other:


a.       Elim must be close enough to the second Red Sea Camp that they are connected in some way, yet, remain distinct sequential stops.

b.      In the Ex 16 narrative Moses routes directly from Elim to the Wilderness of Sin and skips the second Red Sea Camp. Moses included the second Red Sea camp in his detailed Num 33 itinerary, where the order is Elim, Second Red Sea camp, Wilderness of Sin. The solution is simple when you understand that the four stops, 2nd Red Sea camp, Elim, Wilderness of Sin, and Mt. Sinai, were arranged in a south to north line of sight. There is a west to east line of sight between Marah, Elim, and the second Red Sea camp.

c.       Walking southeast from Marah, Israel camped at Elim, then continued in the same southeast direction for 10 km to reach the second Red Sea camp. Leaving the Second Red Sea camp for the Wilderness of Sin, Israel travelled north, passing Elim closely on the left side. The compass bearing upon entering Elim (From Marah) was the same compass bearing from Elim to the Red Sea as one straight line.

d.      In this way, the entire congregation left Elim, visited the Red Sea, which was close to Elim, then passed Elim by on route north to the Wilderness of Sin.

e.      Elim at Ain Ounah is a perfect fit for the Tiran crossing.

25.  The 2nd Red Sea camp is close to the Wilderness of Sin:

a.       The second Red Sea camp is one stop before the Wilderness of Sin so the two sites must therefore be close to each other. Most Nuweiba exodus route maps incorrectly mark the Wilderness of Sin far from the second Red Sea camp.

b.      The Fritz route inserts an extra stop at Elim between the second Red Sea camp at Maqnah on the Gulf of Aqaba and the Wilderness of Sin.

c.       The tiny number of exodus route maps drawn by Unicorn Internet Archeologists (UIA) often put the Wilderness of Sin far away from the Gulf of Aqaba and simply ignore the second Red Sea camp altogether.

26.  Israel arrived as a single group at the Wilderness of Sin on the same day: Ex 16:1

a.       Scripture says all 3 million Hebrews arrived at the Wilderness as a single group on day 31 from Goshen: Saturday, 15th day of the 2nd month, Iyar 15 (Ex 16:1).

b.      The reason this is critical, is because it was on Iyar 15 (a Saturday) that Moses first revealed the 7-day Sabbath/Manna cycle in the Wilderness of Sin. They learned that Manna would fall for six days: Sunday to Friday, with a double portion on Friday. Then Saturday, the 7th day, they were to rest, and no Manna would fall. It is important that Israel arrived as a single group on a Saturday so they could all learn together about the Manna/Sabbath cycle.

c.       The Glen Fritz Nuweiba crossing route splits the 3 million Hebrews into two groups when they first arrive at Elim (Al Bad). One group continues south to the Wilderness of Sin, arriving on Iyar 15 (Ex 16:1), while the second group travels one day through narrow canyons to modern Maqnah on the Gulf of Aqaba as the second Red Sea camp. This group retraces their steps back to Al Bad (Elim) then south to the Wilderness of Sin. The first group arrives at the Wilderness of Sin on Iyar 15 (Day 31) but the second group arrives two full days later on Iyar 17 (Day 33). This second group not only missed Moses’ instructions about the Sabbath/Manna cycle, for them, Quail suddenly appeared in the evening while they were at the second Red Sea camp, then the next day Manna suddenly appeared without explanation from Moses who was two days ahead. They then arrived at Elim on the second day of Manna while they camped for the second time at Elim on Monday. By the time the second group finally got to the Wilderness of Sin on Tuesday (the third day of Manna), the first group had already moved and were still two days ahead between Dophkah and Alush. The first group to arrive at the Wilderness of Sin experienced quail that same evening and Manna in the morning because they grumbled but the second group probably missed all this, being two days of travel away. This directly contradicts Ex 16:1-2 which twice says “all the congregation arrived” and “the whole congregation grumbled about food” the same day.

d.      The Tiran route is a perfect fit for the entire 3 million Hebrews arriving at the Wilderness of Sin together as a single group on the same day.

27.  The 8-day camp at the Wilderness of Sin to learn the Manna/Sabbath cycle:

a.       In Ex 17:1, Israel camped a full 8 days at the Wilderness of Sin as a single group to learn the Sabbath/Manna cycle before moving to Dophkah: "THEN all the congregation of the sons of Israel journeyed by stages from the Wilderness of Sin, according to the command of the Lord, and camped at Rephidim" (Exodus 17:1)

b.      Israel arrived on Saturday, camped 8 days (days 31-38, Iyar 15-22, Saturday to Sunday) at the Wilderness of Sin then left for Dophkah the following Sunday. Only after all the events in chapter 16 had occurred did all the congregation “THEN” leave the Wilderness of Sinai.

c.       Glen Fritz completely missed this important 8-day camp at the Wilderness of Sin to learn the Sabbath/Manna cycle and allowed only one camp day at the Wilderness of Sin. Fritz split the congregation up into two separate travel groups, two days apart. The first group arrives at the Wilderness of Sin on Iyar 15 as per Ex 16:1, then leaves for the unbiblical “third Red Sea Camp” after only one camp day, before continuing to Dophkah. The second group arrives at the Wilderness of Sin two days later on Iyar 17, completely missing Moses’ instruction about the Manna/Sabbath cycle while the first group has already moved from Dophkah and is arriving at Alush.

                                                         i.            First, between the Wilderness of Sin and Rephidim because the difficult terrain would not allow them to move as a single group of 3 million.

                                                       ii.            Second, upon leaving Mt. Sinai when small ceremonial “stage” groups left in a predetermined sequential order when the trumpet was called.

                                                     iii.            “nāsaʿ is also used in the sense of to “journey by stages.” Headed for Sinai, the Israelites “moved on from the Wilderness of Sin by stages” (pl. of massaʿ, Ex 17:1). Later they “set out by stages from the Wilderness of Sinai” (Num 10:12).” (Theological Wordbook of the Old Testament, 1380 נָסַע, p584, Marvin R. Wilson, 1999 AD).

                                                     iv.            While the same word is used for each stage from Goshen to Canaan (Num 33), these two texts represent special and unique cases (Ex 17:1; Num 10:12-28).

b.      The same Hebrew word for stages is nāsa’ (Strongs 4550) and is used in Num 33, Ex 17:1, and Num 10:12-28

                                                         i.            50 camp stops from Goshen to Canaan: "These are the journeys [Stages- nāsa’ - Strongs 4550] of the sons of Israel, by which they came out from the land of Egypt by their armies, under the leadership of Moses and Aaron. Moses recorded their starting places according to their journeys [Stages- nāsa’ – Strongs 4550] by the command of the LORD, and these are their journeys [Stages- nāsa’ – Strongs 4550] according to their starting places." (Numbers 33:1–2)

                                                       ii.            Canyon travel after the Wilderness of Sin: "Then all the congregation of the sons of Israel journeyed by stages [Stages- nāsa’ – Strongs 4550] from the Wilderness of Sin, according to the command of the LORD, and camped at Rephidim." (Exodus 17:1)

                                                     iii.            Individual stage units leave Mt. Sinai in a sequential order of small groups after each trumpet blast: "The LORD spoke further to Moses, saying, “Make yourself two trumpets of silver, of hammered work you shall make them; and you shall use them for summoning the congregation and for having the camps set out [Stages- nāsa’ - Strongs 4550]. ... “When you blow an alarm the second time, the camps that are pitched on the south side shall set out; an alarm is to be blown for them to set out [Stages- nāsa’ - Strongs 4550].  … “Now in the second year, in the second month, on the twentieth of the month, the cloud was lifted from over the tabernacle of the testimony; and the sons of Israel set out on their journeys  [Stages- nāsa’ - Strongs 4550] from the Wilderness of Sinai. Then the cloud settled down in the wilderness of Paran. So they moved out for the first time according to the commandment of the LORD through Moses. The standard of the camp of the sons of Judah, according to their armies, set out first, with Nahshon the son of Amminadab, over its army. … This was the order of march [Stages- nāsa’ - Strongs 4550] of the sons of Israel by their armies as they set out." (Numbers 10:1–28)

c.       Only the Red Sea crossing at the Straits of Tiran to Sinai is a perfect geographic match for journeying in stages between the Wilderness of Sin and Rephidim. The 700 km Tiran crossing exodus route to Mt. Sinai has only one 23 km section of difficult or narrow canyon travel which represents only 3% of the entire journey. All the rest of the route is easy, flat and wide.

d.      The 888 km Nuweiba crossing exodus route to Mt. Sinai has three sections of difficult or narrow canyon travel that add up to a whopping 273 km and represents 31% of the route. One third of the entire Nuweiba route needed to be travelled in small group stages rather than all together as one large unit of 3 million. This contradicts scripture that says they only needed to journey in stages between Dophkah and Alush.

e.      The result is that the Tiran route can easily arrive at Mt. Sinai on day 47 but the Nuweiba route arrives on day 64 according to Glen Fritz’s.

a.       First camp day at Rephidim (Wednesday, day 42): The first Hebrews arrive at Rephidim at the head of a long precession travelling in small group stages between Dophkah and Alush. They complain about no water and God tells Moses that when he later gets to Mt. Horeb (i.e. Mt. Sinai: Ex 17:6) there he will strike the rock to split it so water comes out for the 3 million Hebrews during their 11 month stay camped at Mt. Sinai. Rephidim is not the location of the “split rock” it is where Israel complained about no water. The Amalekites attack (Ex 17:8) those navigating the canyons between Dophkah and Alush and set up a major attack at Rephidim. It was a brilliant strategic military maneuver for the Amalekites to attack while Israel travels for the first time in small stage groups through canyons as opposed to travelling as one large single unit of 3 million in a wide open space. That evening Moses readies the Hebrew army to counterattack in the morning as more and more Hebrews arrived from the canyons of Alush.

b.      Second camp day at Rephidim: (Thursday, day 43): As more Hebrews arrived from the canyons of Alush sometimes the Amalekites prevailed in the battle and sometimes the Hebrews. Moses finally stood on a hilltop and held his hands up to defeat the Amalekites till sunset. Moses built a memorial altar (Ex 17:15). Jethro visited Moses after the defeat of the Amalekites at Rephidim but before they reached Mt. Sinai. Jethro arrived with Moses’ wife Zipporah and his two sons, entered Moses’ tent to talk. Jethro offered sacrifices and the heads of Israel ate a meal likely in part to celebrate the defeat of the Amalekites (Ex 18:12). Midian was the home of Jethro, at Al Bad, where Moses lived for 40 years yet the Biblical itinerary never says Moses camped at Midian. The Nuweiba route of Glen Fritz has Israel camping at Midian (Fritz’s Elim) 3 days but Moses never mentioned this. If Moses passed right through Midian this is when Jethro would have visited Moses. Moses would already have collected his wife and two sons before reaching the Wilderness of Sin. This falsifies the Nuweiba crossing because Moses would have surely mentioned that Israel camped 3 entire days at Midian located at modern Al Bad.

c.       Third camp day at Rephidim: (Friday, day 44) After the Amalekites were defeated, the Hebrews woke up to their second “double portion” of manna because the next day is the second Sabbath day. As the last of the Hebrews completed the journeying in stages between Dophkah and Alush, Moses waited for everyone to arrive as a single group of 3 million again, before travelling to Mt. Sinai. Moses used the period of waiting to judge from morning to night the civil disputes of the people while Jethro watches it all (Ex 18:13).

d.      Fourth camp day at Rephidim: (Sabbath, day 45) This is only the second weekly Sabbath day since creation. Adam, Moses and Abraham never kept the weekly Sabbath day because it was first revealed in 1446 BC. Jethro takes advantage of the Sabbath as a day of reflection to advise Moses to appoint men over groups of 1000’s, 100’s and 10’s to help Moses judge the people (Ex 18:17).

e.      Fifth day at Rephidim: (Sunday, day 46) In the morning, Moses implements the advice of Jethro and appoints men over 1000’s, 100’s and 10’s to judge the people. Jethro leaves Rephidim and returns to Midian (Ex 18:27). Moses departs Sunday Iyar 30 in the day and arrives after sunset at the final camp at Mt. Sinai Sunday evening, which is Sivan 1, day 47 (Ex 19:1). The third new moon rises overnight as the 3 million Hebrews are camped in front of Mt. Sinai, marking the beginning of the month of Sivan. The next morning, (Monday Sivan 1, day 47) Moses brings water from the “split rock” on Sivan 1 at Horeb (Ex 17:6) which will be the main water supply for the next 11 months. A few days later, Moses tells the entire camp of Hebrews to wash their clothes (in this water supply from the split rock) and be ready for God to reveal the Law of Moses and the Ten Commandments three days later on the day of Pentecost.

                                                               i.      “When Jethro offered sacrifices, however, they were to God (ʾelohim). The juxtaposition of the two names indicates that his path did not lie with this newly forming people of Yahweh. He did not follow the presence of the Lord to Sinai, or “serve” him with Israel. Instead he returned to Midian, believing in the Lord God. Jethro was a model of hope for Gentiles, very early in biblical tradition, that the promise God made to Abraham, Jethro’s common ancestor with Moses, would be fulfilled. The placement of his narrative just before the giving of the law at Sinai and the Lord’s specific covenant with Israel is not accidental. Israel would have a special relationship with the Lord because of its creation through the experience of the sea and its early formation at the mountain of God. By including the story of Jethro at this juncture, Israel’s Scriptures acknowledged the possibility of righteous Gentiles who feared God and lived accordingly.” (Understanding the Bible Commentary Series, James K. Bruckner, Exodus 18:1, 2012 AD)

30.  Rephidim is close to Mt. Sinai: Rephidim is one stop from Mt. Sinai so the two sites must therefore be close to each other. Ron Wyatt’s infamous split rock at Rephidim must be rejected because it is on the wrong side of the mountain range and impossibly far from the final Hebrew camp at Mt. Sinai. It is 70 km from Nuweiba to the “split rock” at Rephidim, then another 110 km to reach Mt. Sinai in one stop.


31.  Find Ishmael, find Mt. Sinai: Paul said In Gal 4:25 that Mt. Sinai was in Arabia and some mistakenly search for Arabia in Paul’s day to locate Mt. Sinai. Paul gave a second identifier for the location of Mt. Sinai that most have missed: “Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia”. In the allegory, Hagar is Mt. Sinai and Hagar’s children were the Ishmaelites. At the time of Joseph, the Ishmaelites and Midianites had intermarried to become one tribal unit. There is universal agreement that Midian was in North Saudi Arabia near Al Bad. Forget trying to find Arabia in Paul’s day, find Ishmael in Moses Day. Find Ishmael and you find Mt. Sinai in the land of Midian in north Saudi Arabia.


32.  Hagar’s two flights to Shur were south of not west of Hebron and Gerar:


a.       Chronology and itinerary of Hagar’s first flight from Hebron (Gen 16): Abraham lived in Hebron (Genesis 13:18) where Ishmael was born in 2080 BC when Abraham was 86 years old (Gen 16:16). Probably at the age of 4 years old after Ishmael was weaned and drank water, Sarah mistreated Hagar at Hebron around 2076 BC. Hagar ran south in the direction of “the way to Shur” and found a spring called Beer-lahai-roi, which was located “between Kadesh (Petra) and Bered” (Gen 16:7,14). We don't know for sure where this spring or Bered are located. However, between Kadesh Barnea at Petra and the Way to Shur give us the general area. Since both Kadesh Barnea (Petra) and the Wilderness of Shur (Midian) are Transjordan, we can safely place the "Beer-lahai-rio" spring somewhere within the Wilderness of Paran in modern Jordan near Ezion Geber. Hagar left the spring at Beer-lahai-rio and returned to Hebron to submit to Sarah. While at Hebron (Gen 18:1) the angels fortell the birth of Isaac and then destroy Sodom and Gomorrah (Gen 19) for homosexuality. It was after the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah in 2067 BC that Abraham moved south to the same place Hagar had fled years earlier, perhaps to the spring “Beer-lahai-roi”. Hagar must have told Abraham about the “Beer-lahai-roi” spring because Abraham then left Hebron and moved to the same basic area as the first flight of Hagar. "Now Abraham journeyed from there toward the land of the Negev, and settled between Kadesh (Petra) and Shur (Midian); then he sojourned in Gerar." (Genesis 20:1). This is Transjordan and in the same basic area as the Beer-lahai-rio spring. Notice that Abraham moved to Gerar not Hebron.

b.      Chronology and itinerary of Hagar’s second flight from Gerar (Gen 21): Abraham moves from the “Beer-lahai-roi” spring to Gerar where Abimelech, the Philistine king of Gerar (Gen 26:1) takes Sarah for his wife (Gen 20:2). Isaac is born at Gerar (not Hebron nor Beersheba) in 2066 BC when Abraham was 100. During the three months that followed the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, Abraham moved from Hebron to the Beer-lahai-rio spring, then to Gerar where Abimelech took Sarah as his wife. It was after Abimelech returned Sarah to Abraham that she conceived Isaac who was born 9 months later in 2066 BC or 1 full year after the destruction of Sodom in 2067 BC. After Isaac was weaned at Gerar, Abraham and Sarah banished Hagar around 2064 BC when Isaac was about 2 years old and Ishmael was 16 years old. Hagar leaves Gerar and again travels south towards the wilderness of Beersheba when God opened her eyes to a dug well of water. The Bible then says that Ishmael “lived in the wilderness of Paran" (Gen 21:21). Abraham had been living in Gerar for about 3 years when Hagar was banished. After Hagar fled, the next scene is the covenant Abimelech makes with Abraham at the well Abraham dug at Beersheba (Gen 21:32). This is where the city of Beersheba gets its name. While it is not certain whether Hagar fled from Gerar or Beersheba, we can be certain that she did not flee from Hebron. It seems likely that Hagar fled from Gerar while Abraham was in the process of permanently moving to Beersheba. After getting assurances from Abimelech about ownership of the land surrounding the well at Beersheba, it is certain that Abraham then moved to Beersheba.

c.       Hagar’s flight was south from Gerar to Beersheba, not west from Hebron to Beersheba. This proves the Wilderness of Shur is nowhere near the Suez Canal or the Bitter lakes. The direction of Hagar’s second flight leads towards Elat and is a perfect fit for Shur being in Saudi Arabia. In the story of Joseph being sold to the Ishmaelites, the narration describes the Ishmaelites interchangeably as Midianites multiple times. This proves that Ishmael lived in Midian because they had intermarried. Find Ishmael and you find Midian and Sinai.

d.      The two flights of Hagar and the move of Abraham are both the same basic direction towards Elat and end in the same place: the wilderness of Paran.

33.  The Hebrew camp was east of the summit of Mt. Sinai: Moses would have accessed the tabernacle from the east looking west to facilitate the Holy of Holies being closest to the Mountain. The priests entered the tabernacle with their backs to the rising sun. The main Hebrew camp would be located on the east side of the summit of Mt. Sinai.


a.       Moses draws the border of Judah along the western coast of the Dead Sea to the southern end, then turns east, then south towards Kadesh Barnea. Once the border passes Kadesh Barnea on the left, as a marker outside the promised land, the border then turns west towards the Wadi Arish and ends at the Mediterranean Sea. Scripture says “your southern border shall extend from the end of the Salt Sea eastward.” (Num 34:3).

b.      Glen Fritz located Kadesh Barnea 35 km east of Ein Hatseva (Hormah) which is deep inside tribal Judah and must be rejected out of hand. Israel did not spend 38 years in the land of Judah.

c.       Since AD 1916 Kadesh has been misplaced at Ain el-Quderiat, which is 27 km east of the River of Egypt, the boundary between Egypt and Israel. It is puzzling why Christians miss the fact that when scripture says that the boundary of Judah “went up to the south of Kadesh” that Kadesh cannot be inside the promised land.


37.  Moses spent 38 continuous years at Kadesh Barnea:

a.       In 1446 BC Israel spent 11 months, 5 days at Mt. Sinai (Numbers 10:11-12). In 1444 BC, Moses arrived at Kadesh Barnea in the 1st month of the 3rd year (Numbers 10:11; 20:1) then spent 38 continuous years at Kadesh Barnea until they left for Canaan in 1407 BC.

b.      Aaron died on the 1st day of the 5th month of the 40th year of the wilderness wandering (summer 1407 BC). Shortly after mourning Aaron for 30 days, the people left Mount Hor, defeated the Transjordan nations, and then mourned for Moses 30 days.

c.       Joshua crossed the Jordan on the 10th day of the 1st month of the 41st year (spring, 1406 BC), four days before the 41st Passover, which was exactly 40 years to the day they left Goshen. They started counting sabbatical years and Jubilee after crossing the Jordan. (Num 33:38; 20:28; Deut 34:8; Josh 4:19; 5:10)

38.  Edom did not live in the Negev at the time of the Exodus: Edom was a Transjordan nation at the time of the Exodus and did not occupy Judah or any land southwest of the Salt Sea in the Negev. Those who place Kadesh Barnea at Qudeirat create the fiction that Edom occupied the Negev east of Qudeirat across the southern Arabah Valley in modern Jordan. They bring the western border of Edom deep into Judah and mark it directly beside Qudeirat.

a.       The first incursion of Edom into the tribal allotment of Judah and Simeon did not occur until after the first attack of Nebuchadnezzar in 605 BC. This is validated through the Arad Ostraca.

b.      At age 30, Esau moves from Judah to Seir, conquered the Horites in 1926 BC and began to occupy their historic Transjordan territory east of the Arabah valley in the highlands of modern Jordan. During the time of the Exodus 1446 BC, Edom's territory ran beside Kadesh Barnea at Nabatean Petra from the gulf of Aqaba north to the Wadi Zered at the south end of the Salt Sea. After continuously occupying their historic Transjordan lands for 1321 years, they began to move west into the Judean Negev, for the first time, after Nebuchadnezzar's first attack on Jerusalem in 605 BC.

c.       By  597 BC the Edomite Threat became very serious when one of the four Negev Judean fortresses, Ramah-Negev, was about to be captured by the Edomites. Zedekiah issues orders to Malchijah, the troop commander at the Arad fortress, to send troops from Arad and the nearby Kinah fortress, to the fortress at Ramah-Negev to secure its safety and defense. Malchijah relays Zedekiah's orders by sending Eshijah from Arad to his son Gemariah, the commander of the nearby fortress at Kinah.


d.      The fortress commander replied on Arad Ostracon #40 (Arad Ostracon #40 Letter to Zedekiah: "We won't send troops" 597 BC) It is a letter written on a broken pottery sherd from Gemariah to his father Malchijah at Arad that records the message that defied both his father Malchijah and King Zedekiah: "No, we will not send any of our troops to Ramah-Negev as directed by the king." The reason was because moving the troops out of Kinah to nearby Ramah-Negev would seriously endanger the security of Kinah itself against the Edomites! There were simply not enough troops to secure both Kinah AND Ramah-Negev.

e.      King Zedekiah recorded his threatening response in a follow-up letter on another pottery sherd to Eliashib, the kings executive agent at the Arad fortress on Arad ostraca #24 (Arad Ostracon #24 Letter from Zedekiah: "Send troops or be executed" 597 BC). Zedekiah's follow-up letter to Eliashib on Arad ostraca #24 was simple: Send 50 soldiers from Arad and 100 from Kinah under the command of Malchijah from Arad, and deliver them to the command of Elisha, commander of the Ramah-Negev fortress that is under Edomite attack OR DIE.

f.        In the end, we know from archeology that all four fortresses were lost to the Edomites by the time Nebuchadnezzar makes his third and final attack on Jerusalem in 587 BC when Solomon's temple was destroyed.

g.       The Edomites assisted in destroying the city of Jerusalem and even looted the Temple itself. During the final 587 BC Babylonian attack on Judah many Jews fled for their lives and were captured and killed by the Edomites at the crossroads near the Arad, Kinah, Ramah Negev and Moladah fortresses. "To Edom: Do not stand at the fork of the road to cut down their fugitives; and do not imprison their survivors In the day of their distress." (Obadiah 10-14) Edom was condemned by God for its role in the destruction of Judah, Jerusalem and Solomon's temple in 587 BC and became an extinct nation by the time Judah returned from captivity in 536 BC. “To Edom: Like the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah with its neighbors,” says the Lord, “no one will live there, nor will a son of man reside in it." (Jeremiah 49:16-18)

h.      The archaeological record refutes the fiction that the border of Edom was in the Negev near Ain el-Qudeirat at the time of the Exodus. This means that the location of Kadesh Barnea on most Bible maps is wrong.
  

39.  The Negev of Judah was bounded by the Salt Sea, the Gulf of Aqaba and the Wadi El-Arish. Advocates of Kadesh Barnea at Qudeirat and others like Glen Fritz whose site for Kadesh is 35 km east of Ein Hatseva (Hormah) are forced to create the fiction that the “Biblical Negev” did not extend south of Arad and Beersheba.


40.  The Conquest began in 1406 BC and took 6 years. Then during the first sabbatical year of 1399 BC they set up the tabernacle tent at Shiloh where it stood for 305 years until 1094 BC. In 1094 BC, the Ark of the Covenant was captured by the Philistines at Ebenezer then transported to 3 of the five pentapolis cities of the Philistines: Ashdod, Gath and Ekron. The Philistines sent the Ark back to Judah at Beth-Shemesh where the locals transported it to Kirath-jearim where it sat for 92 years from 1093 to 1001 BC. David successfully moved the Ark to Jerusalem in his second attempt in 1001 BC. Meanwhile, in 1094 BC the Tabernacle tent was moved to Nob on the Mount of Olives where it stood for 76 years from 1094-1018 BC. In 1018 BC Saul executed all the priests and moved the Tabernacle tent to Gibeon where it stood for 58 years from 1018-960 BC. The Ark of the Covenant was moved into the Temple of Solomon upon its completion in 960 BC and the tabernacle tent of Moses was moved from Gibeon and put into storage inside the Temple, along with the Sea of Moses.

NEXT

Introduction:

1.        We can prove from the Bible alone that Mt. Sinai is in Arabia, not the Sinai Peninsula or the Negev.

a.           The timing of the journey shows Israel crossed the Red Sea on about day 25 from Goshen.

b.           The association of Mt. Sinai with Ishmael whose homeland was Midian.

2.        We propose Jebel al-Lawz (Mt. Lawz) as Mt. Sinai. At 2,580 meters, Lawz is the tallest mountain in northern Arabia. There are two reasons why we chose Mt. Lawz as Mt. Sinai.

a.           First, it is in Arabia.

b.           Second, Josephus said Mt. Sinai was the tallest mountain in the region near Midian.

Why Mt. Sinai is at Mt. Lawz:

1.        Since almost every geographer from AD 1000-1700 had no concept of the Gulf of Aqaba or the Sinai Peninsula, this forced the idea that they crossed the red sea at the northern tip of the Gulf of Suez.


2.        Josephus said that the tribe of Simeon bordered with both Arabia and Egypt (Ant. 5:82).

a.           This provides another line of evidence that the Sinai Peninsula in either 1406 or AD 70 and the time of Paul, was NOT considered to be Arabia.

b.           “So Joshua took both Eleazar and the senate, and with them the heads of the tribes, and distributed the land to the nine tribes, and to the half tribe of Manasseh, appointing the dimensions to be according to the largeness of each tribe. (81) So when he had cast lots, Judah had assigned him by lot the upper part of Judea reaching as far as Jerusalem, and its breadth extended to the Lake of Sodom. Now in the lot of this tribe there were the cities of Askelon and Gaza. (82) The lot of Simeon, which was the second, included that part of Idumea which bordered upon Egypt and Arabia. As to the Benjamites, their lot fell so, that its length reached from the river Jordan to the sea; but in breadth it was bounded by Jerusalem and Bethel; and this lot was the narrowest of all, by reason of the goodness of the land; for it included Jericho and the city of Jerusalem.” (Josephus Antiquities 5.80-82)

3.        Apostle Paul taught that Mt. Sinai was located in Arabia in Gal 4:25, where Ishmael lived.

a.           In AD 54, when Apostle Paul wrote Gal 4:25, the wilderness of Egypt (Sinai Peninsula) was never called Arabia.

b.           In AD 50, the Nabataeans (Nabateans) never referred to the Sinai Peninsula as "Arabia" and it was not until the Roman's annexed the Wilderness of Egypt from the Egyptians in 106 AD that it was first called "Arabia".

c.           The Nabateans never occupied any part of the Sinai Peninsula.

d.           At the time of Apostle Paul, the Sinai Peninsula was Egyptian/Ptolemaic not Arabian.


4.        Find Ishmael, find Mt. Sinai: Gal 4:25
    

a.           Apostle Paul gave us the key in to locate Mt. Sinai: Mt. Sinai is where Ishmael lived!

b.           Forget looking for Arabia, find Ishmael and you find Mt. Sinai!

c.           Ishmael lived “east of his brothers” at Shur then intermarried to become one tribe with the Midianites at the time of Joseph.

d.           Notice when Joseph was sold by his brothers in Genesis 37, the narration switches between describing the byers as Ishmaelites (v27), then Midianites (v28), then Ishmaelites (v28), then Midianites (v36).

e.           This proves that Ishmael lived in Midian, which is where Apostle Paul said Mt. Sinai is located.

f.            This is how you use the Bible to prove Mt. Sinai is in Saudi Arabia!

5.        Mt. Sinai is located near the Amalekites and Midianites:

a.           In 1446 BC the Edomites, Midianites, Ishmaelites and Amalekites were Transjordan nations “of the east” and did not live in the Wilderness of Egypt (Sinai Peninsula) or the Judean Negev.

b.           At the time of the Exodus in 1446 BC, neither Edom, the Midianites or the Ishmaelites or the Amalekites controlled the Wilderness of Egypt (Sinai Peninsula). It was Egypt's land and they controlled it.

c.           The Amalekites attacked Moses near Mt. Sinai at Rephidim. Notice the Midianites and the Amalekites worked together in Judges 6:3,33; 7:12 to oppress Israel shortly after the death of Deborah in 1144 BC.


6.        In 1446 BC, Egypt controlled mining in the Wilderness of Egypt (Sinai Peninsula) at the time of the Exodus:

a.           Copper mines include those at Timna and Serabit el-Khadim in the Sinai. 

b.           The traditional exodus route to Mt. Musa, takes Israel right past the copper mines Serabit el-Khadim that was active in 1446 BC. Moses only made one stop between Goshen and Etham at Succoth in order to collect the Hebrew slaves working in the mines. Succoth was located directly beside the mines on the Gulf of Aqaba.

c.           Several ancient Hebrew inscriptions found in these mines have been translated include the “Moses” inscription.
  

7.        Mt. Sinai is due south of Edom: Dawning from the North

a.           This spectacular hidden gem of information has been missed by most Gospel preachers.

b.           On Pentecost 1446 BC God “ascends” Mt. Sinai and the mountain explodes into fire, lightening and smoke. While Exodus 24:17 says God “descended” on Mt. Sinai, Psalm 68:17–18 speaks of how God/David “ascended” His/his throne on the Mt. Sinai/Zion.  


                                                               i.      When the people were waiting at the foot of Mt. Sinai for God arrive, they look due north and a small cloud appear in the distance in the direction of Mt. Paran and the land of Edom. As God arrives, the cloud gets larger and larger until He hovers over Mt. Sinai.

                                                             ii.      This infers that Mt. Sinai must be due south of Edom.

                                                           iii.      Scripture pictures the "throne of God" as being in the north.

                                                           iv.      Amazingly, God "dawned from the north from where His throne is located upon Mt. Sinai on Pentecost 1446 BC.

                                                             v.      Jerusalem is 340 km due north of Mt. Lawz.

                                                           vi.      From the vantage point of the Hebrews at Sinai they are unaware that God’s throne is not in Edom, but Jerusalem.

c.           God’s throne is located in the North:

                                                               i.      “But you said in your heart, ‘I will ascend to heaven; I will raise my throne above the stars of God, And I will sit on the mount of assembly In the recesses of the north. ‘I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will make myself like the Most High.’" (Isaiah 14:13–14)

d.           Job was an Edomite who prophesied at the time of Abraham (2000 BC), that God would dawn on Mt. Sinai in 1446 BC

                                                               i.      “Out of the north comes golden splendor; Around God is awesome majesty." (Job 37:22)

e.           Bible verses:

                                                               i.      "He said, “The LORD came on Sinai, and dawned on them from Seir; He shone forth from Mount Paran, And He came from the midst of ten thousand holy ones; At His right hand there was flashing lightning for them." (Deuteronomy 33:2)

                                                             ii.      "Who is this who comes from Edom, with garments of glowing colors from Bozrah, This One who is majestic in His apparel, Marching in the greatness of His strength? “It is I who speak in righteousness, mighty to save.” Why is Your apparel red, And Your garments like the one who treads in the wine press?" (Isaiah 63:1–2)

                                                           iii.      "“LORD, when You went out from Seir, When You marched from the field of Edom, The earth quaked, the heavens also dripped, Even the clouds dripped water." (Judges 5:4)

                                                           iv.      "God comes from Teman, And the Holy One from Mount Paran. Selah. His splendor covers the heavens, And the earth is full of His praise." (Habakkuk 3:3)

f.            There is a direct line north, from Mt. Lawz, through Mt. Paran (Edom) to Jerusalem. Jerusalem is due north of Mt. Lawz. More details.


8.        The burning bush was near Midian not Egypt:

a.           Bible says Mt. Sinai was in Arabia near Midian where Jethro lived:

                                                               i.      Stephen said in Acts 7:30 that Moses saw the burning bush in the wilderness of Sinai, which was near the base of the mountain.

                                                             ii.      "When Pharaoh heard of this matter, he tried to kill Moses. But Moses fled from the presence of Pharaoh and settled in the land of Midian, and he sat down by a well. Now the priest of Midian had seven daughters; and they came to draw water and filled the troughs to water their father's flock." Exodus 2:15-16

                                                           iii.      Burning bush: "Now Moses was pasturing the flock of Jethro his father-in-law, the priest of Midian; and he led the flock to the back side of the wilderness and came to Horeb, the mountain of God. " Exodus 3:1

                                                           iv.      After leaving Sinai and back home in Midian: "Now the Lord said to Moses in Midian, "Go back to Egypt, for all the men who were seeking your life are dead." Exodus 4:19

                                                             v.      "Now the Lord said to Aaron, "Go to meet Moses in the wilderness." So he went and met him at the mountain of God and kissed him. " Exodus 4:27

                                                           vi.      At Mt Sinai: "Now Jethro, the priest of Midian, Moses' father-in-law, heard of all that God had done for Moses and for Israel His people, how the Lord had brought Israel out of Egypt. " Exodus 18:1 "Then Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, came with his sons and his wife to Moses in the wilderness where he was camped, at the mount of God. " Exodus 18:5 "Then Moses bade his father-in-law farewell, and he went his way into his own land." Exodus 18:27

b.        There is no reason why the burning bush could not be near Midian in Arabia. The Bible does not say that Moses made a long journey away from Midian.

c.         Midian (Al-Bad) is very distant from Mt. Musa. It is not realistic to think Moses pastured his flocks so far from his home. The Bible does not say that Moses went into the Sinai Peninsula. When Moses saw the burning bush, it says that he wandered in the rear wilderness. The fact that no other reference is given means that the only logical conclusion is that it was the rear wilderness of Midian.

d.        Josephus indicated that most men avoided this area even though it was lush grazing for crops which does not fit the Sinai Peninsula at any point in history. (Josephus Antiquities 2.265, AD 70). Agatharchides describes the Wilderness of Shur near Midian as lush with vegetation for grazing (Agatharchides quoted by Diodorus 49 BC, 3.43.6-7)

e.        The Bible says that Moses went to the "behind side [Hebrew: "achar"] of the wilderness" Literally: achar "the hind or following part" (NASB Hebrew dictionary). The east side of the Lawz would most certainly be described as the "behind wilderness". It is kind of like saying that Moses went to "the back forty".

 

C. Ancient literary sources that Mt. Sinai was in Saudi Arabia near Midian:

1.        225 BC Demetrius the Chronographer Demetrius believed that Moses dwelt in Madyan, (Midian) which is universally accepted as Al-Bad.

a.           Even those who oppose a location of Mt. Sinai in Saudi Arabia agree that Midian was at Al-Bad.

b.           Demetrius lived and worked in Alexandria, which meant he had access to the largest library in the world. Demetrius located Moses’ 40 years after fleeing pharaoh in the city of Madyan (al Bad) in northwestern Arabia. Eusebius quoted Demetrius: “And they dwelt in the city Madiam, which was called from one of the sons of Abraham. For it says that Abraham sent his sons towards the East to find a dwelling-place: for this reason also Aaron and Miriam said at Hazeroth that Moses had married an Aethiopian woman.” (Eusebius Preaparatio Evangelica 9:29.1-3, quoting Demetrius the Chronographer)

2.        169 BC: Agatharchides describes the Wilderness of Shur as being lush with vegetation and water. This cannot describe anywhere in the Sinai Peninsula at any time in history.

a.           “After these places there is a well-watered plain which, because of the streams that flow through it everywhere, grows dog's tooth grass, Lucerne and also lotus the height of a man. Because of the abundance and excellence of the pasturage it not only supports flocks and herds of all sorts in unspeakably great numbers but also wild camels and, in addition, deer and gazelles. In response to the abundance of animals which breed there, crowds of lions, wolves and leopards gather from the desert. Against these the herdsmen are compelled to fight day and night in defense of their flocks. Thus, the advantage of the country is the cause of misfortune to its inhabitants because Nature generally gives men together with good things those that are harmful. (Agatharchides of Cnidus, On the Erythraean Sea 169 BC, translated by Stanley M. Burstein, 1989, book 5, fragment 91b. Diodorus 49 BC, 3.43.6-7)

3.        AD 70: Josephus  gives us three clues to the location of Mt. Sinai. He says Mt. Sinai is the highest mountain in the area near the city of Midian (Al Bad) which was near the Red Sea (Aqaba) and that the Sinai Peninsula was not Arabia.

a.           Jethro was in Midian near Red Sea: “Moses took his flight through the deserts, and where his enemies could not suspect he would travel; and, though he was destitute of food, he went on, and despised that difficulty courageously; (257) and when he came to the city Midian, which lay upon the Red Sea, and was so denominated from one of Abraham’s sons by Keturah, he sat upon a certain well, and rested himself there after his laborious journey, and the affliction he had been in.” (Jospehus Antiquities 2.256-257)

b.           At Burning bush Sinai was tallest mountain in the area: “Now Moses, when he had obtained the favor of Jethro, for that was one of the names of Raguel, staid there, and fed his flock; but some time afterward, taking his station at the mountain called Sinai, he drove his flocks thither to feed them. (265) Now this is the highest of all the mountains thereabout, and the best for pasturage, the herbage being there good; and it had not been before fed upon, because of the opinion men had that God dwelt there, the shepherds not daring to ascend up to it; and here it was that a wonderful prodigy happened to Moses; (266) for a fire fed upon a thorn bush, yet did the green leaves and the flowers continue untouched, and the fire did not at all consume the fruit branches, although the flame was great and fierce.” (Josephus Antiquities 2.264-266)

c.           Sinai Peninsula was not Arabia: Josephus said that the tribe of Simeon bordered with both Arabia and Egypt (Ant. 5:82). This provides another line of evidence that the Sinai Peninsula in either 1406 or AD 70 and the time of Paul, was NOT considered to be Arabia.

4.        AD 325: Helena vs. Eusebius and the Onomasticon: Eusebius has a dictionary of places called the Onomasticon which he wrote at the same time Helena chose Mt. Musa in a dream.




